Preface 
This marks the 50th anniversary since the first edition of the Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry was published in 1967. That edition consisted of one volume of about 600 pages with less than 100 contributors. The current 10th edition has over 5,000 pages in two volumes with over 650 contributors. This expansion represents the growth of psychiatry marked by an explosion of research and knowledge in neural science and in basic biological and psychological science. 
On this 50th anniversary, it bears noting the role of Harold Kaplan, M.D., who recognized that psychiatry needed a textbook in the tradition of other great textbooks in medicine. He worked hard to achieve that goal, which he did well before his death in 1998. In recognition of that accomplishment this textbook still carries his name. We should also take note of our long and productive relationship with our publishers, beginning with Williams & Wilkins, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, and Wolters Kluwer. Certain key persons stand out without whom the continuity of this textbook could not have occurred nor endured. These include Charles Reville, James Gallagher, Sarah Finnegan, and Charley Mitchell. There are others of course; but these four represent the very best in the world of publishing. They served as counselors, friends, and advisors, and at times, stern task masters. We take this opportunity to thank them once again. 
Psychiatry, like all of medicine, is both art and science; but in the case of psychiatry, perhaps more art than science. Over the course of 50 years, however, the trajectory in psychiatry has veered toward more research and science, the results of which have been remarkable and the advances of knowledge robust. But psychiatry remains a “frontier science” and like all frontiers presents new and exciting areas yet to be explored. 
The role of psychiatry in medicine has never been more important. Mental illness has increased and our understanding of its etiology and our ability to treat is not yet where we want it to be, even though both have advanced tremendously over this last half century. This observation was expressed by the Editors in the Preface to the first edition, part of which is reproduced below. It was prescient in many ways and as the reader will note, remains relevant today: 

========98========

The underpinnings of clinical psychiatry have increased both in number and in strength; practitioners now have at their disposal large amounts of new knowledge in three major areas of behavioral science which must be incorporated within the existing theoretical and therapeutic knowledge in psychiatry. These three areas are the basic sciences such as neurophysiology and neuropharmacology; those social sciences which deal with individuals; and those which deal with the behavior of groups and of systems. Knowledge in those fields is not to be viewed as a kind of intellectual veneer. It is in fact a prerequisite for clinical competence. The perplexing array of drugs, for example, not only invites comprehension of their mode of action on the central nervous system, but also it demands such understanding to obviate the mechanical dispensing of preparations in the manner of a tradesman. 
Similarly, the increasing awareness of the contributions of social factors to the development as well as the maintenance of mental illness calls for systematic training of the student in relevant aspects of the social sciences. The interplay between individual and social structure is especially important in disorders such as addiction, alcoholism, delinquency, and educational disabilities, problem areas that psychiatry can no longer avoid. 
The Comprehensive Textbook is a “university without walls” whose aim is to educate all those who work with the mentally ill—psychiatrists and other physicians, psychologists, psychiatric social workers, psychiatric nurses, and mental health professionals from all fields. Its goal remains unchanged: to foster professional competence and to ensure the highest quality of care. The textbook has earned the reputation of being a thoroughly up-to-date encyclopedic compendium of psychiatric knowledge. As editors, we are extremely gratified by its wide acceptance and use both in this country and abroad. No other major textbook in psychiatry can lay claim to having such a long, consistent, and enriched publication history. 
COMPREHENSIVE TEACHING SYSTEM 
The textbook forms one part of a comprehensive system developed by us to facilitate the teaching of psychiatry and the behavioral sciences. At the head of the system is the Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry, which is global in depth and scope, designed for and used by psychiatrists, behavioral scientists, and all workers in the mental health field. Synopsis of Psychiatry is a relatively compact, highly modified, original, and current text useful for medical students, psychiatric residents, practicing psychiatrists, and mental health professionals. Two special texts, derived from Synopsis, are the Concise Textbook of Clinical Psychiatry and the Concise Textbook of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. The former covers descriptions of all psychiatric disorders, including their diagnosis and treatment and the latter limits it to disorders of children and adolescents. Both books are useful for clinical clerks and psychiatric residents who need a succinct overview of the management of clinical problems. Another part of the system, Study Guide and Self-Examination Review of Psychiatry, consists of multiple-choice questions and answers; it is designed for students of psychiatry and for clinical psychiatrists who require a review of the behavioral sciences and general psychiatry in preparation for a variety of examinations. The questions are modeled after and consistent with the 

========99========

format used by the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology (ABPN), the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME), and the United States Medical Licensing Examination (USMLE). Other parts of the system are the pocket handbooks: Pocket Handbook of Clinical Psychiatry, Pocket Handbook of Psychiatric Drug Treatment, Pocket Handbook of Emergency Psychiatric Medicine, and Pocket Handbook of Primary Care Psychiatry. These books cover the diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric disorders, psychopharmacology, psychiatric emergencies, and primary care psychiatry, respectively, and are designed and written to be carried in the pocket by clinical clerks and practicing physicians, whatever their specialty, to provide a quick reference. Finally, the Comprehensive Glossary of Psychiatry and Psychology provides simply written definitions for psychiatrists and other physicians, psychologists, students, other mental health professionals, and the public. Together, these 10 books create a multifaceted approach to the teaching, study, and learning of psychiatry. 
Changes to the Tenth Edition 
Adding new contributors and new sections to each edition is a hallmark of the Comprehensive Textbook, and this edition is no exception. New authors ensure a fresh approach to each topic and keep the textbook vital and current. The editors are deeply grateful to the more than 2,000 psychiatrists and behavioral scientists who contributed to previous editions, all of whom maintained the highest standards of scholarship. Many of those sections remain classics in the field and are accessible to the interested reader. 
The editors especially wish to thank Herbert Pardes, M.D., for writing the Foreword to this textbook in which he comments on important issues facing the field, both now and in the future. Dr. Pardes served as Vice President for Health Sciences and Dean of the Faculty of Medicine at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons and is one of this country’s most distinguished psychiatrists and educators. 
Classification of Mental Disorders. A fifth edition of the American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders was published in 2013, titled DSM-5. It contains the official nomenclature used by psychiatrists and other mental health professionals in the United States; the psychiatric disorders discussed in the textbook are consistent with and follow that nosology. Every section dealing with clinical disorders has been updated thoroughly and completely to include the revisions contained in DSM-5. The reader also will find DSM-5 tables and descriptions for every major mental disorders listed in that manual as it has been in each of our editions. 
The DSM is the “law of the land” and, as mentioned previously, is the nomenclature used throughout this textbook; however, some clinicians and 

========100========

researchers have reservations about various aspects of the DSM, which readers will find mentioned herein. As future editions of the DSM appear, this textbook, as always, will allow room for dissent before and especially after every new version appears. It will continue to provide a forum for discussion, evaluation, criticism, and disagreement, while duly acknowledging the official nomenclature. 
ICD-10. Readers also should be aware of a parallel classification system developed by the World Health Organization (WHO) called the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10). There are textual differences between DSM and ICD, but according to treaties between the United States and the WHO, the diagnostic code numbers must be identical to ensure uniform reporting of national and international psychiatric statistics. ICD diagnoses and numerical codes are accepted by Medicare, Medicaid, and private insurance companies for reimbursement purposes in the United States. 
Neural Sciences. The many advances in the neural sciences have been so vast that the reader will hardly recognize this area of the book since the last edition of this textbook was published. Almost every section has been updated and revised by new contributors and many new sections have been added. Several new sections deserve special mention: Epigenetics, which deals with the interaction of genes and the environment; Microbiome, which explores the importance of the microbiome in psychiatry; Systems Neuroscience which covers how neuroscience has broadened its base; Human Connectome, which examines the exciting new area of neuronal mapping and connectivity; Computational Neuroscience and Psychiatry, which explores how technology has expanded our knowledge of the brain; and Neurodevelopment, which examines how the brain and nervous system evolve and develop. We thank John Kristal, M.D., who served as contributing editor of this section. He is a renowned neuroscientist who brought his expertise to bear in organizing this area of the textbook. 
Schizophrenia. As with the neural science section, the sections on schizophrenia were extensively updated to provide the reader with information about latest advances. The rapidly growing field of neuroimaging in schizophrenia is presented in three sections: Structural Brain Imaging, Functional Brain Imaging, and Molecular Brain Imaging. Three additional sections, Schizophrenia: Phenotypic Manifestation, Phenomenology of Schizophrenia, and Psychosis as a Defining Dimension in Schizophrenia, describe schizophrenia in a unique way and provide a humanistic understanding of what it means to suffer from psychosis. The section, Medical Health in Schizophrenia, provides an in-depth coverage of the medical care required to thoroughly manage this disorder. The Concept 

========101========

of Recovery in Schizophrenia describes the complexities and varieties of outcomes and prognoses of this illness. The reader will find the most extensive survey and overview of schizophrenia to be found in any modern textbook of psychiatry. We thank Carol A. Tamminga, M.D., contributing editor, for her scientific and creative abilities in organizing this section. 
Mood Disorders. The chapters covering the entire range of mood disorders provide the most up-to-date exposition of these disorders available in any textbook. New advances and new concepts in bipolar disorder are represented in two important chapters: Psychoeducation for Bipolar Disorder and Brain Circuits in Major Depressive and Bipolar Disorders. The first increases our therapeutic understanding and the second increases our scientific understanding of these complex disorders. A new section, Suicidal Behavior: Epidemiology and Overview, recognizes the increase in suicide both in this country and around the world and examines new methods of prevention and treatment. We wish to thank Hagop Akiskal, M.D., for his work as contributing editor for mood disorders in this and previous editions of the textbook. 
Anxiety Disorders. This section has been thoroughly rewritten and updated to provide the reader with a comprehensive overview of the topic. The reader will find two updated sections of great interest: Genetics of Anxiety Disorders and Neuroimaging of Anxiety Disorders, which represent the latest advances in the field and the cutting edge of new approaches in understanding the etiology of these disorders. We wish to thank Kathleen Ries Merikangas, Ph.D., section editor, for her superb help in organizing this section. 
Psychosomatic Medicine. The chapter on Psychosomatic Medicine includes three important sections, Diabetes, Transplantation, and Burns, all of which represent areas in which psychiatry has made significant contributions. Even though not part of the DSM-5 nomenclature, the editors have included a chapter, Obesity, which is a major public health problem in which psychiatry has an important role to play both in understanding the disorder and its treatment. A new section, Management of Chronic Pain, was written especially for this edition to call attention to this ancient malady in which the modern day psychiatrist has much to contribute. Another new section in this edition, Psychiatric Sequelae of Critical Illness, covers the need for psychiatrists to engage with seriously ill patients and participate in their care. The Psychosomatic section is one of the most comprehensive to be found in any textbook. Karin Neufeld, M.D., was contributing editor for this section, and we extend our sincere thanks to her. 

========102========

Public and Global Psychiatry. As described by the authors of Public and Community Psychiatry, public psychiatry includes medical and psychiatric services directed “for the public good,” which are comprehensively described. The reader will find an extensive overview of psychosocial needs and services around the world, in the section, World Aspects of Psychiatry. Other updated sections in this area include The Psychiatric Hospitalist, A Socio-Cultural Framework for Mental Health and Substance Abuse Disparities, and Criminalization of Persons with Severe Mental Illness. One of the editors, Pedro Ruiz, M.D., played a crucial role in organizing this section of the textbook. 
Geriatric Psychiatry. The section on geriatric psychiatry has been expanded to include three new sections: the first, HIV and Aging, examines what was once a fatal disease to one that is now chronic and found in older adults as a result. The second, Technology for Seniors, covers the effects of the digital and technological revolution on the mental and physical health of the geriatric population. Finally, the new chapter, Positive Psychiatry of Aging, focuses on how persons who age can maintain a quality of life that allows them to reap the benefits of old age, which, instead of being seen as a disease, is and should be a period of contentment and meaningfulness. The editors wish to thank Dilip V. Jeste, M.D., for his role as contributing editor to geriatric psychiatry, which he carried out with outstanding ability and judgment in this and previous editions. 
Biological Therapies 
The psychopharmacological revolution in psychiatry began in the middle of the last century. In the first edition of this textbook, there were only about 50 pages devoted to this area. In this edition, there are close to 1,000 pages. Such is the tremendous growth and importance of this branch of psychiatric therapeutics. To help the reader understand this modality better, we were the first to recognize that drugs used to treat mental disorders should be classified according to their mechanisms of action rather than using such broad categories as antidepressants, antipsychotics, anxiolytics, and mood stabilizers, which are overinclusive and do not scientifically reflect the clinical use of psychopharmacological agents. For example, many antidepressant drugs are used to treat anxiety disorders; some anxiolytics are used to treat depression and bipolar disorder; and drugs from all categories are used to treat other clinical problems such as eating disorders, panic disorders, and impulse control disorders. Furthermore, there are many other drugs used in the treatment of mental disorders that do not fall neatly into any broad classification. Information about all pharmacological agents is comprehensive and includes data about indications, pharmacokinetics, dosages, adverse effects, and drug–drug interactions. 

========103========

Psychotherapies 
Despite the dramatic rise in pharmacologic treatment of mental disorders, psychotherapy continues to play a major role in the care of the mentally ill. Psychotherapy of the Psychoses is an important new addition to this section. We hope this inspires a new generation of psychiatrists and mental health professionals to revisit what psychotherapy has to offer to those with psychoses, especially those suffering from schizophrenia. A major advance in psychotherapy is to be found in the chapter, Mentalization Based Therapy, written by its originators, a new type of psychotherapy effective in a broad range of mental disorders. And finally, on the cutting edge, is the section, The Use of Hallucinogenic Drugs in Psychotherapy, which describes an exciting new area that may benefit those with mental illness and those with physical illness as well. 
Child Psychiatry 
This section of the book is “a text within a text.” It is thoroughly comprehensive and each section represents an important new advance in diagnosis and treatment. Neuroimaging in Child and Adolescent Psychiatry describes in detail how imaging techniques are advancing the field of child psychiatry. The section, Assessment of Preschoolers, describes the special approaches to diagnosis for this unique developmental period. New advances in genetics are covered in the section, Genetics in Child Psychiatry. A thorough discussion of sleep problems in children is covered in the new section, Pediatric Sleep Disorders. Finally, a new section, Impact on Parents of Raising a Psychiatrically Disabled Child, deals with the difficult problems involved in managing this special patient population. 
We wish to thank Caroly Sue Pataki, M.D., for her outstanding efforts as section editor. She has served in this capacity for several editions, and we owe her a debt of gratitude for her prodigious efforts. 
Neurocognitive Disorders 
This section of the textbook has been reorganized to reflect the new diagnostic nomenclature of DSM-5. The sections that cover delirium and dementia were completely updated and revised. All sections were rewritten by new contributors to provide a fresh approach to these brain disorders. We thank Robert A. Sweet, M.D., for his extraordinary help in organizing this section. 
Case Histories 
Throughout time, the teaching of psychiatry depended on the discussion and analysis of case histories, which still play an important part in psychiatric education. Case descriptions are used extensively in the text to add clarity and bring life to the clinical disorders described. They represent 

========104========

the experiences of the many contributors to this textbook who share their clinical expertise and wisdom with our readers. Cases appear in shaded type so that they can be found easily. We also direct the reader to Famous Named Cases in Psychiatry, in Appendix A, which chronicles important psychiatric case histories from the 16th through the 21st century. We wish to acknowledge the author, David Davis, M.D., who is deceased but whose work lives on in this astounding compilation. 
Citations 
The style of this textbook is similar to other great textbooks of medicine: no internal citations are used. This requires contributors to evaluate the extensive and sometimes conflicting literature to create evidence-based conclusions for the benefit of the reader. That is often a difficult task, but as experts in their respective fields, they do it well. Contributors were also asked to limit references to 30 to 40 major books, monographs, and review articles and to include current references; thus, some citation lists are not as long as some of the authors would have wished. Contributors were also asked to note the five most important references with asterisks. References are as up-to-date as possible. The editors are also mindful that modern-day readers consult internet databases to stay abreast of the most current literature and they encourage that trend. 
Acknowledgments 
As mentioned earlier, over 2,000 psychiatrists and behavioral scientists have contributed to this text over the past half century. Obviously, we cannot thank them all. Many are long gone; but their work lives on in the various editions of this book which can be accessed in this digital era. This can be said of them all: we received their best work which is the highest compliment we can give them as editors. Many of their works are considered classics in the field. 
The support staff in New York and Miami was of tremendous help. In New York we thank Nitza Jones Sepulveda who worked as senior project editor on this and previous editions of the Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. Others who helped were Hailey Weinberg and Heidianne Grech. We also thank Dorice Viera, Associate Curator of the Frederick L. Ehrman Medical Library at the NYU School of Medicine for her valuable assistance in the preparation of this and previous editions in which she was so very helpful. In Miami, we wish to thank Gladys Robles who was of immense help, especially to Dr. Pedro Ruiz. 
Special mention should be made of Norman Sussman, M.D. and Samoon Ahmad, M.D. They are not only contributors to this edition but also helped the editors in the production of this book. Dr. Sussman was contributing editor in biological psychiatry for several past editions and Dr. 

========105========

Ahmad was contributing editor in psychopharmacology to many of our Pocket Handbooks. We value them not only as colleagues but also as close friends. We also wish to acknowledge James Sadock, M.D., and Victoria Sadock Gregg, M.D., for their assistance in their areas of expertise, emergency adult and emergency pediatric medicine, respectively. We want to take this opportunity to thank those who have translated this and other books into foreign languages, including Bulgarian, Chinese, Croatian, French, German, Greek, Indonesian, Japanese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, and Turkish, in addition to a special Asian and international student edition. 
We mentioned above our relationship with our publishers and those working there which was marked, by an unprecedented history of close collaboration and mutual respect. There have been so many persons over those 50 years without whose help and support these textbooks could not have been produced. We cannot possibly list them all; but in this edition there are several who deserve mention. We thank Andrea Vosburgh, Development Editor, who worked with great enthusiasm and who helped us immensely in every aspect of production. We also thank Franny Murphy, Senior Development Editor, who handled each manuscript with extreme care and interacted with almost every contributor offering them both guidance and support. We also wish to thank Chris Miller of Aptara who worked on many of our books over the years and whose expertise in the production of this book was invaluable. At Wolters Kluwer we thank Lisa McAllister, Vice-President, Medicine and Advance Practice Publishing and Rebecca Gaertner, Executive Editor, Ashley Fischer, Production Developmental Editor, Bridgett Dougherty, Production Project Manager, and Chris Teja, Acquisitions Editor for their support as well. 
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS 
In the early editions of this book, there were no contributing editors. Psychiatry was a field in which there was not as much specialization and subspecialization as there is today. The various experts in their respective fields were few and as editors we knew who they were. But as the field grew, we knew that to keep the book up-to-date and current we had to enlist the aid of experts who knew other experts in their respective fields. So began the long list of contributing editors whose help writing this edition and those that came before it possible. These men and women, experts in their respective fields, kept us informed of not only the latest advances in their respective fields but also provided us with the names of contributors most knowledgeable in a particular area of psychiatry and the behavioral sciences. In this edition they include the following experts who deserve special recognition: Robert Robinson, M.D., who organized the section on Neuropsychiatry ; John Kristal, M.D., who organized the section on Neural Science ; Roberto Lewis-Fernández, M.D., who organized the 

========106========

section on the Psychological Sciences ; Robert A. Sweet, M.D., who was responsible for the section on Neurocognitive Disorder ; Eric Strain, M.D., who organized the section of Substance Related Disorders ; Charles Nemeroff, M.D., who organized the section on Biological Psychiatry ; Carol A. Tamminga, M.D., who organized the sections on Schizophrenia ; Hagop S. Akiskal, M.D., who organized the section on Mood Disorders ; Kathleen Merinkangas, M.D., who organized the section on Anxiety Disorders ; Karen Neufeld, M.D., who organized the Psychosomatic Medicine section; Caroly Sue Pataki, M.D., who organized the section on Child and Adolescent Psychiatry ; and Dilip V. Jeste, M.D., who organized the Geriatric Psychiatry section. The editors thank them for their prodigious efforts. The editors and the field of psychiatry are in their debt. 
We especially wish to thank those at our respective Universities who enabled us to pursue our work as faculty scholars. We have been helped especially by Charles R. Marmar, M.D., Professor and Chairman of the Department of Psychiatry at the NYU School of Medicine who supported our work throughout. 
Finally, we thank each of our contributors who cooperated in every aspect of this textbook. 
Benjamin J. Sadock, M.D. Virginia A. Sadock, M.D. 
Pedro Ruiz, M.D. 

========107========

Foreword HERBERT PARDES, M.D. 
Psychiatry has a long and complex history with substantial impact on today’s society. The extent and complexity is covered by this remarkable book. Psychiatry has come a great distance from the time when people thought psychiatric conditions may be due to demons in the brain or some other exotic force. Bleuler and Kraeplin worked, studied, and categorized psychiatric illness. Freud introduced psychodynamics and psychoanalytic theory, the backdrop for psychotherapeutic approaches beginning in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. 
Globally countries are faced with large populations dysfunctional because of psychiatric problems. In the early 20th century, most patients were hospitalized in chronic state psychiatric hospitals. Treatment was limited. Electroconvulsive and other convulsive therapies were used; psychotherapies were used for people less blatantly psychotic. It was not until the 1950s that major psychiatric medications started to be introduced to address symptomatically many of the symptoms that afflict people with such illnesses. At the high point there were close to 600,000 people in state hospitals around the country in the 1950s. Most care was provided in in- patient settings. 
And then, many factors—new medications, patient’s rights, budgetary implications of maintaining large numbers of psychiatric institutions, criticism that they were nontherapeutic—combined into a movement to change psychiatric care. Some heroes have tried to humanize care over the years with mixed success. 
Patients with more modest symptomatology were treated in out-patient offices by psychiatrists and other mental health professionals. Stigma was universal and destructive. 
President Kennedy fostered legislation making mental health care more visible, accessible, and patient centered. This generated the Community Mental Health program in the 1960s and 1970s. This federal plan involved bringing mental health to the community with the intended construction of 1,500 community mental health centers. Assuming 200,000 patients would be assigned to each center, the projection was 300 million people 

========108========

could be served. 
The intention to move patients out of the chronic hospitals led to the deinstitutionalization era of psychiatric patients launched in the 1960s and continuing for decades. Some argued patients were discharged from hospitals only to find themselves in other institutions like nursing homes, prisons, or as part of the homeless community. 
In the evolution of mental health programs, World War II was important. Recruitment by the armed forces revealed the large numbers that had psychiatric illness. This excluded them from service. Beyond that, the large numbers of soldiers who during their war service had personal psychiatric challenges referred to as “battle fatigue,” contributed to the rallying cry to have a national focus on mental health. In the late 1940s, the federal government established the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) charged with conducting research, clinical care through the community mental health centers, and education to generate a national clinical mental health workforce. The latter included psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, nurses, and social workers, as well as paraprofessionals. 
Medicines such as Thorazine, antidepressants, and lithium became available. Enthusiasm regarding discharging patients from chronic hospitals and putting them out in the community strengthened. 
Given the promise and need for the workforce charged to care for psychiatric patients, there was great interest among physician trainees for psychiatry as a career. This was sustained through the early 1960s. Possibly because of the diminishing assessment of the therapeutic impact of psychodynamic approaches, there was a drop in recruits to psychiatry from about 10% in the early 1960s to about 2 to 3 percent of graduating medical students by the beginning of the 1970s. 
Mental health was a particularly low priority during the republican national administrations in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Money for support of the programs at NIMH was sharply curtailed, while other areas such as cancer and heart disease were increased. Lack of reimbursement rose as a major insidious issue for those trying to promote mental health services. 
Important in the evolution of mental health and of psychiatry was the Carter Commission of the late 1970s. This Commission recommended major changes in mental health care. The “Mental Health Systems Act” passed in 1980 was intended to increase federal involvement in mental health and focus on underserved populations such as children, minorities, elderly, chronically mentally ill, and psychiatric patients in nonpsychiatric medical settings. But after working several years and actually passing that legislation, the Carter Administration was replaced by the Reagan Administration. It challenged sharply the budgets of the NIMH, and the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, and National Institute on Drug Abuse conducting programs that dealt with alcohol and drug 

========109========

abuse, respectively. 
The late 1970s witnessed an improvement in the congressional view regarding NIMH. The Reagan Administration was impressed by findings such as the demonstration by Lou Sokoloff of the value of 2-deoxyglucose used in PET scanning for visualization of activity in the brain. This was enhanced by the Nobel Prize awarded to Roger Sperry, an NIMH research psychologist grantee which led to the understanding that there are major differences in the functions of the two halves (left and right) of the brain. 
These advances from biological research were accompanied by a vigorous effort by the mental health community leading to revaluing of mental health programs. Productive studies emanated from Seymour Kety regarding genetic contributions to psychiatric disorders. Others produced increasingly systematic studies of brain and behavior. These developments improved the regard in which mental health programs were held during the 1980s. The Reagan Administration began recommending increases in the NIMH budget more comparable to the size of increases allocated to other federal medical areas—heart disease, cancer, among others. 
Important too was the development of more sophisticated epidemiological programs. These came about in the late 1970s and 1980s. These highlighted by the Epidemiologic Catchment Program generated by the NIMH were conducted in a more rigorous manner and confirmed the large amounts of mental illness. 
Further, in the enhancement of mental health programs was the explosive rise of activity in neuroscience in the 1980s continuing today. It became clear owing to the flourishing of research that psychiatric causative factors were of a mixed and complicated nature brought about by multiple factors. In the psychiatric community, there was increased tension that arose owing to disagreement regarding the importance of the biological, congenital, and genetic factors as opposed to environmental factors. 
One unfortunate longstanding hypothesis that was repudiated was that the “schizophrenogenic parents” bore responsibility for psychiatrically ill people. The excitement mounting in the 1980s and 1990s, and the early 20th century in genetics lead to wide scale searches for genetic factors. 
The fact that close to 20 percent of the population suffer in any given year from psychiatric illness began to have an impact on the general public view of the importance of psychiatric programs. Psychiatry had primarily been treated as a low priority and consequently suffered from a paucity of resources. This was compounded by the fact that there were few if any procedures useful in psychiatric diagnosis and care in contrast to other medical disciplines. Those procedures are often invaluable in the generation of resources available to healthcare professionals working on orthopedic, cardiac, cancer disorders, among others. 
While brain sciences evoked considerable excitement, activity in the psychosocial realm in that period failed to elicit comparable enthusiasm. 

========110========

It was important to achieve consistency regarding psychiatric diagnosis. It had been demonstrated through US/UK studies that the percentages of psychiatric diagnoses varied considerably from country to country. This led to attempts stimulated by the NIMH and the American Psychiatric Association to gain international agreement on the criteria for psychiatric disorders to achieve more consistency. As a result, a major conference was held in Copenhagen Denmark in the late 1970s bringing worldwide psychiatric experts together. This facilitated the thrust for consistency in criteria for psychiatric diagnosis. The DSM (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual) for psychiatric illness became a major effort of organized psychiatry. 
Several DSM efforts sharpened further the observation that in making psychiatric diagnoses, the Achilles heel facing psychiatric diagnosis was that it did not have hard and fast criteria for diagnosis and evaluation as contrasted to other medical disciplines—for instance, the use of blood pressure readings in hypertension, EKGs in heart disease, and glucose readings in diabetes. 
From the 1980s through today, there have also been broad efforts to amplify and sharpen the interventions used for psychiatric care. Multiple kinds of psychotherapy including brief psychotherapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and interpersonal psychotherapy became available changing what had been a predominant use of psychodynamic psychotherapy and psychoanalysis. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) was refined to make the side effects of the treatment more effective. With many improvements ECT focused more on specific conditions for which it could be of greatest help, for example, major unresponsive depression. 
Meanwhile there was a proliferation of psychiatric drugs. One goal was to reduce the side effects disturbing to patients and another was to increase options for doctors treating patients for psychiatric illness. Multiple available psychopharmacological treatments meant that doctors could switch from one drug that failed to another to find the right medication for a given patient. 
Over time, it was recognized that many psychiatric conditions which might look manifestly similar were brought about by different factors. Thus, since in practice the same treatment was given to many people, the medications had uneven results. 
This resulted in disappointment at the modest percentages of people who had definitive and sustained help from psychopharmacological treatments. Of related interest, mental retardation had at one point been thought of as related to a limited set of factors. Over the years, this changed and mental retardation is today recognized as being the result of varied combinations of factors. The fact that the etiological factors vary also suggested that if one could match specific treatments to patients’ needs, one might improve the overall outcome statistics of patients using 

========111========

psychiatric interventions. 
When considering mental health and psychiatry care today, it is noteworthy that a number of causes, some positive and some negative, have created a unique situation. Psychiatric programs and psychiatry is receiving much more visibility. There are many reasons: 
1. The unfortunate reality that large numbers of Veterans return from war 
with psychiatric problems including PTSD, drug abuse, etc. 
2. The increase in suicide in both the civilian and veteran population. 3. The recognition that psychiatric care so frequently coexists with 
nonpsychiatric medical situations, that is, comorbidity. Not only has this 
been recognized as an increasing phenomenon, but as economists search 
for the costly components of healthcare requiring maximum resources, it 
is apparent patients with comorbidities such as diabetes and depression 
or heart disease and depression need more care. Consequently, care for 
these patients involves higher costs. 
4. The above factors are important; their impact is dramatically augmented 
by the rash of violent mass killings frequently perpetrated 
indiscriminately by patients with psychiatric illnesses on large crowds in 
settings around the world. This greatly enhanced public attention. 
The debate regarding where society should put its effort in reaction to these terrifying and destructive mass killing is highly contentious. While it is recognized that generally psychiatric patients are not prone to be perpetrators of violence, they are often the culprits in episodes of mass killings by individuals mostly with guns. 
The realization that attention to policies both regarding gun availability and also expanded access to psychiatric treatment as components of a joint strategy may be optimal has been thwarted because the issue is highly politicized. 
This multitude of factors, that is, veterans problems, increased suicide, increased cost of comorbid psychiatric and nonpsychiatric conditions, mass violence along with recognition of the overwhelming numbers of individuals who both need care yet are winding up in prisons and jails, has given mental health an unprecedented visibility. 
CITIZENS AND ADVOCATES 
A welcome development began in the late 1970s. Families of psychiatric patients created an organization, the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI) to advocate for better programs for the mentally ill. 
In a noteworthy meeting in 1979, parents of schizophrenic people came together in Madison, Wisconsin and agreed to launch a citizen advocacy group particularly focused on mental illness. While organizations already existed, some groups like the NAMI prioritized strengthening programs in research and care for seriously ill psychiatric patients. 

========112========

That led to a merger in which NAMI and a schizophrenia foundation from Kentucky agreed to establish a private not-for-profit support organization, the National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression (NARSAD) (recently renamed Brain and Behavior Research Foundation [BBRF]). This became the primary private organization worldwide supporting psychiatric research. It focused on basic and clinical research to understand the causes of major psychiatric illness and generate more and better treatment. From its launch in the mid-1980s, BBRF has provided $346 million to thousands of scientists of diverse disciplines around the world to stimulate more psychiatric research. 
NAMI became the lead national family advocacy effort working to increase NIMH support and create a more constructive alliance between citizens, families, and psychiatric health professionals—both in clinical and research activity. 
The NIMH has the largest pool of money by far for psychiatric programs with its intramural program at Bethesda and its extramural program around the world. A second government organization, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMSHA), was created in the 1980s to conduct the block grant program for mental health care that resulted from the conversion from the earlier federal grants in mental health, alcohol, and drugs to block grants for states. NIMH and SAMSHA became the two primary federal organizations that support mental health work. 
The intent of the Reagan Administration was to transfer back to the states money and responsibility for these programs. This undid some of what the Carter Administration had recommended or accomplished. 
CURRENT PSYCHIATRIC RESEARCH 
The result of public and private support of research has led to many exciting developments. 
Once clear that genetic factors play a role in psychiatric illness, a multitude of studies over the last several decades have identified genes as contributory factors in some of the main psychiatric illnesses. This work continues to determine the full extent of genetic involvement in psychiatric illness. 
Also invaluable has been brain imaging. The search is for changes in the brain, early signs of developing psychiatric problems, and determination of the linkage between observed brain changes and individual behavioral functioning, and illness. 
One particularly unique new research approach is Optogenetics. This has provided an acclaimed approach for examining the functions of nerve cells by using light to help determine how they are influenced and modified. 
The range of research possibilities is exhaustive. There is ongoing 

========113========

considerable effort designed to understand the way the treatments work. 
In suicide, many questions range around identifying warning signs and clarifying how one can intercept a developing effort to complete a suicide. Deep brain stimulation therapy has become another area of intense interest for depression and transcranial magnetic stimulation for unresponsive depression. 
Unfortunately, pharmaceutical industry has decreased its research on potential medications for psychiatric illness. The funding overall for individuals doing psychiatric science has been adversely influenced by this lessening of pharmaceutical support. On the other hand, there has been benefit from more equitable increases in NIMH support and increased private support. 
EDUCATION 
In education the increased role of biological factors has influenced heavily the training of medical students and psychiatric residents. Whereas several decades ago psychodynamic, psychotherapeutic education, supervision, and monitoring dominated training and education, this has decreased substantially. 
In many ways the position that Gerry Klerman articulated when he was head of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration stressing the value of combined psychological and pharmacological therapies in the treatment of a particular individual has become more mainstream. 
PRIMARY CARE AND MENTAL HEALTH CARE 
One of the other major challenges is the need for greater manpower. This has led to increased use of people other than mental health professionals especially, primary care clinicians. They are seen as a valuable resource with which to respond the vast amount of psychiatric need. Various programs are being developed that integrate primary and mental health care. Fueling this trend is the belief that by such integration, cost will go down, and treatment will be better. The program led by Jürgen Unutzer in Seattle Washington is a good example of the effectiveness of this perspective. 
At New York-Presbyterian Hospital and Columbia University Medical Center, the finding that one can fully integrate psychiatric faculty into the team on a given internal medicine in-patient unit and as a result achieve better outcomes and reduced length of stay should result in a wide embrace of this type program. 
In psychiatry it is increasingly recognized that in facilitating the careers of young people, mentoring and modeling is important. Repeatedly, young people point to revered or respected senior faculty member who were critical in their maturation. The mentors are appreciated as helpers, guides, 

========114========

and models to emulate. 
EARLY INTERVENTION 
What also has become apparent is that early intervention is important in the treatment of psychiatric conditions. Therapeutic assistance in a timely way means that rather than having a patient suffering from an illness, one can avoid the effects of the illness itself compounding the original disorder. This potential exacerbation of their dysfunction is countered by early identification. This is central to prevention. Devising programs which match the patient’s needs is most valuable. 
SUMMARY 
There have been vast changes in psychiatric care, psychiatric research, and psychiatry over the past 150 years. Still the elusive nature of the etiology of psychiatric conditions remains perplexing. There have been Nobel prizes won by Drs. Eric Kandel, Arvid Carson, and Paul Greengard, and Lasker Awards by Drs. Lou Sokoloff, Nancy Wexler, Eric Kandel and others, but the core complexity of psychiatric illness remains. New developments like the launch of the Lieber Institute at Johns Hopkins by Steve and Connie Lieber, two of the most generous philanthropists in psychiatric research, and the federal launch of a major effort to explicate the functions of the brain are welcome developments. The stigma that for decades has inhibited philanthropic support for psychiatric care has been diminishing; there has been more support as illustrated by the Graham Boeckh Foundation in Canada. 
The world oversees an enormous population of psychiatric need. The resources available are uneven around the world. And yet as readers will see illustrated in this most informative edition of the latest Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry, the global range of potential scientists and programs working on these problems is encouraging. Also, global collaboration is increasing, allowing exploitation of the collective increased resources of the scientific enterprise. 
Psychiatric patients are certainly treated better now than in the past. But given criminalization and resource weakness, there is still a long way to go. Whether the new forces mentioned earlier will induce greater attention and better programming for psychiatric problems remains to be seen, but certainly is a goal for which the broad mental community is striving. 

========115========

1 Neural Sciences 
▲ 1.1 The Neuroscience of Psychiatry 
JOHN H. KRYSTAL, M.D. 
INTRODUCTION 
This section of the Textbook contains a remarkable collection of chapters that provide an overview of the landscape of the current understanding of the neuroscience foundations of psychiatry. If the brain is the principal organ of psychiatry, then an understanding of brain science is the starting point for a comprehensive knowledge of the field. These chapters bear careful reading as they reflect the first indications of the emergence of explanatory science within psychiatry. This progress arises from the application of technologies that have arisen since the prior edition of the textbook, techniques such as optogenetics, DREADDs, and CRISPR, for example. It also arises from the maturation of fields, such as cognitive neuroimaging and psychiatric genetics; transforming them from intellectual curiosity to powerful tools to answer important questions about the human behavior and mental illness. 
What are signs of this progress? There are many inspiring stories. With respect to etiology, advances in genome sequencing have enabled the discovery of rare gene variants that contribute significantly to illness risk and account for approximately 1 percent of the cases of autism. Psychologists are beginning to understand where in the brain these genes are preferentially expressed and when in development these genes are critically engaged. These studies set the stage for disease-modifying interventions. Similar progress is emerging for schizophrenia, a disorder that appears to share some risk genes with autism. With respect to pathophysiology, optogenetic studies in animals and neuroimaging studies in humans have provided deep new insights into how depression might be expressed at the level of neural circuits. These “raw data” provide the basis for computational neuroscience studies that rigorously describe for the first time the relationships between the activity of neurons and networks or 

========116========

networks and behavior. In turn, these insights are providing a basis for a growing array of neurostimulation treatments for mood disorders. At the same time, some transformative advances in treatments, such as the discovery of the rapid antidepressant effects of ketamine, have stimulated basic science advances that shed new light on the neurobiology and may lead to new classes of antidepressant medications. 
Why do psychiatrists need to understand neuroscience to practice their art? Psychiatry is moving away from viewing individual psychiatric patients solely as representative of static diagnostic categories, as might be reflected in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual. The bold leadership of Thomas Insel in advancing the NIMH Research Domain Criteria initiative has pushed the field to encompass an understanding of the neural circuitry of behavior and the dimensional features of the pathophysiology and phenomenology of psychiatric patients that cross traditional diagnostic boundaries. One might predict that as psychiatrists become increasingly comfortable incorporating an understanding of the neurobiology of psychiatric disorders into their clinical formulations of individual patients, it will enrich their understanding of their patients and suggest new opportunities to enhance treatment. 
The author will illustrate this point by referring to a case conference in which he participated, which he first presented in a blog to the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology in January 2012. The Yale Psychiatry Residents invited the author to interview a patient and then to present his formulation to their group. The author came to the session without any information about the patient and had 30 minutes to interview the patient. 
The patient was a young man who suffered with long-standing psychotic symptoms. He met diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, exhibiting many domains of preserved intellectual capacity but noted problems with sustained attention and memory. He also exhibited low levels of affective blunting but impairments in many social and functional domains. Upon interview, he also described vividly a childhood pattern of accentuated attention to nonsocial environmental details and he both described and displayed perseverative tendencies and mild irritability when challenged. He also mentioned that both the diagnoses of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder ran in his family. With regard to treatment, he felt that clozapine was the most effective medication prescribed for him. In addition, he was treated with the anticonvulsants, lamotrigine, and valproate. 
How could psychiatrists understand the appearance of features of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and his family history of both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder? This patient presented opportunities to reflect on challenges in our diagnostic schema. Bleuler suggested that autistic thinking was a core feature of schizophrenia, but this feature is no longer included in the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Yet, a growing number of rare gene variants with relatively large effects on the risk for schizophrenia 

========117========

also contribute to the risk for ASD. Overlap of schizophrenia and ASD symptoms might be an illustration of pleiotropy. Similarly, recent large- scale GWAS studies report regions of the genome that appear to convey relatively modest increases in the risk for both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Thus, genetics is providing some clues that may help to guide thinking about the features of the presentation of individual patients that conflict with the diagnostic categories of DSM-IV. 
Why would someone add the antipsychotics lamotrigine and valproate to enhance clozapine treatment of schizophrenia? Currently, there is a small evidence base to guide the pharmacotherapy of clozapine-resistant schizophrenia symptoms. The author was reminded of the evidence in animals and humans, that lamotrigine, by itself or in combination with clozapine, attenuates some of the effects of psychotigenic NMDA receptor antagonists. Subsequently, lamotrigine was not found generally effective as an antipsychotic augmentation strategy unless patients had symptoms that had been highly resistant to treatments including clozapine. Further, anticonvulsants, like lamotrigine, might protect against the seizure risk associated with pharmacotherapy with higher clozapine doses. Thus, there was a rationale for adding lamotrigine to clozapine in this case. However, the same could not be said for valproate. Psychiatrists discussed the pharmacoepidemiologic data describing common co-prescription of valproate and antipsychotic medications for schizophrenia despite the lack of compelling efficacy data for valproate in this adjunctive role. 
As noted in the blog, the invitation from the residents to interview a patient in front of them and to present a “biopsychosocial” formulation was embedded in an unspoken question. Does it make a difference to a practicing psychiatrist to be a student of genetics and translational neuroscience? The answer turned out to be, absolutely! In fact, it seemed that the author’s background in neuroscience informed nearly every aspect of the session, the questions that he asked, the hypotheses that he generated about the patient, and his thoughts about the treatment plan. While it was not yet clear to him how his knowledge of the genetics of schizophrenia would guide the treatment of this patient, it was not hard to see how keeping abreast of developments in neuroscience might someday make this possible. 
REVIEW OF THE NEUROSCIENCE CHAPTERS 
To facilitate this type interplay between neuroscience and clinical psychiatry, the authors structured this section of the Textbook to cover the waterfront of progress in neuroscience that was most relevant to psychiatry. Experts in the field were asked to provide chapters that would be rigorous but accessible to clinicians. The section builds from elemental questions, that is, genetics, the properties of neurons, the basics of chemical neurotransmission, cortical networks and network functions, and 

========118========

the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. The topics covered are broad, but some topics were not included. Similarly, the reviews provide depth, but hopefully not at the expense of accessibility. 
The first subsection begins with two chapters that describe the organization and development of the brain. Chapter 1.2 provides a wonderful introduction to the neuroanatomical organization of the brain. Chapter 1.3 describes the processes through which the complex organization of the brain emerge through development. This chapter also introduces the reader to adult neurogenesis, the process through which new neurons emerge in the hippocampus in adulthood. 
The next eleven chapters provide an overview of the basic signaling mechanisms that underlie communication and plasticity within the brain. Five chapters review the principal classes of chemical neurotransmission in the brain including monoamine neurotransmitters (Chapter 1.4), the amino acid neurotransmitters glutamate and GABA (Chapter 1.5), neuropeptides (Chapter 1.6), and novel neurotransmitters (Chapter 1.8). Chapter 1.7 covers the neurotrophic factors. These substances are increasingly implicated in neuropsychiatric pathophysiology and treatment, particularly the activity of both traditional and rapidly acting antidepressant medications. Intraneuronal signaling, the mechanisms through which the effects of transmitters and drugs are transduced chemically within neurons, are reviewed in Chapter 1.9. Neurophysiologic functions are covered in Chapter 1.10. Two chapters address the molecular biology of psychiatric disorders. Next, there is an update on “omic” technologies (genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics) in Chapter 1.11. Chapter 1.13 covers neural– immune interactions, with a particular focus on neuroinflammation, a key mediator of stress effects on the brain. This subsection concludes with a chapter on chronobiology. Chapter 1.14 covers the genes, circuitry and mechanisms that govern circadian and other rhythms that have profound effects on energy metabolism, sleep, behavior, and mood. 
The third subsection consists of four chapters related to technologies that are increasingly informing psychiatrists’ understanding the biology of psychiatric disorder. Chapter 1.15 addresses advances in electroencephalography including studies of event-related potentials and cortical oscillations. Chapter 1.16 addresses advances in magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance spectroscopy, a central approach for noninvasively studying brain structure, function, and chemistry. Chapter 1.17 reviews the other principal noninvasive approaches for studying brain chemistry, particularly for quantifying the levels of specific brain proteins that are present in very low quantities in the brain, such as the receptors for neurotransmitters. Chapter 1.18 focuses on advances in gene mapping approaches that are contributing to the emerging understanding of the genetics of psychiatric disorders. 
The next subsection includes eight chapters that cover areas of focus in 

========119========

psychiatry research. Chapter 1.19 covers the important topic of animal models for psychiatry and addiction. Animal models have provided fundamental insights into the neurobiology and treatment of psychiatric disorders. Nonetheless, these models have shown important limitations in their ability to predict new treatments for psychiatric disorders, a factor that has contributed to the paucity of new treatment mechanisms in psychiatry over the past 20 years. There are chapters in this subsection on pain (Chapter 1.20), sense of self (Chapter 1.21), sleep (Chapter 1.22), and appetite (Chapter 1.23). These are fundamental features of human experience that have been studied intensively. The last two sections cover relatively new areas that are playing growing roles in the field of psychiatry. Epigenetics, that is, the mechanisms through which environmental factors have lasting and even transgenerational effects, is reviewed in Chapter 1.25. Finally, Heath reviews the implications of microbiome research for human behavior. 
The final subsection on the neuroscience of psychiatry covers special topics in systems, cognitive, and behavioral neuroscience. Chapter 1.26 covers issues in systems neuroscience. Chapter 1.27 addresses the broad impact of learning theory. Barch, a central figure in the Human Connectome Project, addresses the important area of human cortical functional connectivity in Chapter 1.28. Chapter 1.29 addresses the growing area of computational neuroscience, that is, the effort to develop computational models for cortical microcircuit and macrocircuit functions. The systems neuroscience of cortical development is covered in Chapter 1.30. Finally, Salloum addresses the evolving topic of social cognition. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In the final analysis, psychiatrists must be humble with regard to the reach of their knowledge. The brain is unimaginably complicated and fundamental aspects of the pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders remain beyond grasp. Psychiatrists are prone to overestimate their knowledge and to underestimate the challenges faced in advancing their understanding of the etiology, pathophysiology, treatment, and prevention of neuropsychiatric disorders. Nonetheless, psychiatrists have a clinical, scientific, and humanistic imperative to advance their understanding of the neurobiology of psychiatric disorders and to see that this knowledge informs the clinical practice of psychiatry. 
REFERENCES 
Anand A, Charney DS, Oren DA, et al. Attenuation of the neuropsychiatric effects of ketamine with lamotrigine: support for hyperglutamatergic effects of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2000;57:270–276. 
Association AP. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press; 2013. 

========120========

Brody SA, Geyer MA, Large CH. Lamotrigine prevents ketamine but not amphetamine-induced deficits in prepulse inhibition in mice. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2003;169:240–246. Chen H, Deshpande AD, Jiang R, Martin BC. An epidemiological investigation of off-label anticonvulsant drug use in the Georgia Medicaid population. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2005;14:629–638. 
Duman RS, Aghajanian GK, Sanacora G, Krystal JH. Synaptic plasticity and depression: new insights from stress and rapid-acting antidepressants. Nat Med. 2016;22:238–249. 
Farber NB, Jiang XP, Heinkel C, Nemmers B. Antiepileptic drugs and agents that inhibit voltage- gated sodium channels prevent NMDA antagonist neurotoxicity. Mol Psychiatry. 2002;7:726– 733. 
Goff DC, Keefe R, Citrome L, et al. Lamotrigine as add-on therapy in schizophrenia: results of 2 placebo-controlled trials. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;27:582–589. 
Gulsuner S, Walsh T, Watts AC, et al. Spatial and temporal mapping of de novo mutations in schizophrenia to a fetal prefrontal cortical network. Cell. 2013;154:518–529. 
Insel T, Cuthbert B, Garvey M, et al. Research domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classification framework for research on mental disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167:748– 751. 
Krystal JH, State MW. Psychiatric disorders: diagnosis to therapy. Cell. 2014;157:201–214. Moskowitz A, Heim G. Eugen Bleuler’s Dementia praecox or the group of schizophrenias (1911): a centenary appreciation and reconsideration. Schizophr Bull. 2011;37:471–479. 
Ripke S, Sanders AR, Kendler KS, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies five new schizophrenia loci. Nat Genet. 2011;43:969–976. 
Schwarz C, Volz A, Li C, Leucht S. Valproate for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD004028. 
State MW, Levitt P. The conundrums of understanding genetic risks for autism spectrum disorders. Nat Neurosci. 2011;14(12):1499–1506. 
Tiihonen J, Wahlbeck K, Kiviniemi V. The efficacy of lamotrigine in clozapine-resistant schizophrenia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Schizophr Res. 2009;109:10–14. Treadway MT, Pizzagalli DA. Imaging the pathophysiology of major depressive disorder—from localist models to circuit-based analysis. Biol Mood Anxiety Disord. 2014;4:5. 
Tye KM, Mirzabekov JJ, Warden MR, et al. Dopamine neurons modulate neural encoding and expression of depression-related behaviour. Nature. 2013;493:537–541. 
Wang XJ, Krystal JH. Computational psychiatry. Neuron. 2014;84:638–654. 
Williams HJ, Zamzow CR, Robertson H, Dursun SM. Effects of clozapine plus lamotrigine on phencyclidine-induced hyperactivity. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2006;30(2):239–243. 
Willsey AJ, Sanders SJ, Li M, et al. Coexpression networks implicate human midfetal deep cortical projection neurons in the pathogenesis of autism. Cell. 155:997–1007. 
▲ 1.2 Functional Neuroanatomy 
DARLENE SUSAN MELCHITZKY, M.S., AND DAVID A. LEWIS, M.D. 

========121========

The broad range of affective, cognitive, and behavioral characteristics of humans arises as a consequence of specific patterns of activation in networks of neurons that are distributed across the central nervous system (CNS). These patterns of activation are mediated by the connections among specific brain structures. Consequently, understanding the neurobiologic bases for the disturbances in affective, cognitive, and behavioral processes present in psychiatric disorders requires an appreciation of the major principles governing the functional organization of these structures and their connections in the human brain. This section reviews some of these anatomic principles and illustrates them in the functional circuitry of several neural systems. These neural systems—the thalamocortical, basal ganglia, and limbic systems—were selected because of their particular relevance for psychiatric disorders. 
PRINCIPLES OF BRAIN ORGANIZATION 
Cells 
The human brain contains approximately 1011 nerve cells, or neurons. In general, neurons are composed of four morphologically identified regions (Fig. 1.2–1): (1) the cell body, or soma, which contains the nucleus and can be considered the metabolic center of the neuron; (2) the dendrites, processes that arise from the cell body, branch extensively, and serve as the major recipient zones of input from other neurons; (3) the axon, a single process that arises from a specialized portion of the cell body (the axon hillock) and conveys information to other neurons; and (4) the axon terminals, fine branches near the end of the axon that form contacts (synapses) generally with the dendrites or the cell bodies of other neurons, release neurotransmitters, and provide a mechanism for interneuronal communication. 
Most neurons in the human brain are considered to be multipolar in that they give rise to a single axon and several dendritic processes. Although there are numerous classification schemes for neurons in different brain regions, almost all neurons can be considered to be either projection or local circuit neurons. Projection neurons have long axons and convey information from the periphery to the brain (sensory neurons), from one brain region to another, or from the brain to effector organs (motor neurons). In contrast, local circuit neurons or interneurons have short axons and process information within distinct regions of the brain. 
Neurons can also be classified according to the neurotransmitters they contain (for example, the dopamine neurons of the substantia nigra). Identification of neurons by their neurotransmitter content in anatomic studies provides a means for correlating the structure of a neuron with certain aspects of its function. However, neurotransmitters have defined effects on the activity of neurons, whereas complex brain functions, such as 

========122========

those disturbed in psychiatric disorders, are mediated by the coordinated activity of ensembles of neurons. Thus, the effects of neurotransmitters (or of pharmacologic agents that mimic or antagonize the action of neurotransmitters) on behavioral, emotional, or cognitive states must be viewed within the context of the neural circuits that they influence. 
In addition to neurons, the brain contains several types of glial cells (Table 1.2–1), which are at least 10 times more numerous than neurons. Astrocytes are the most numerous class of glial cells and are classified as either protoplasmic or fibrous. Protoplasmic astrocytes are large cells located exclusively in the gray matter with many fine and elaborate processes. In contrast, fibrous astrocytes are smaller with less complex processes and reside exclusively in the white matter. Protoplasmic astrocytes have been demonstrated to serve a number of functions, including participation in the formation of the blood–brain barrier (BBB), removal of glutamate and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) from the synaptic cleft, and buffering of the extracellular potassium (K+) concentration. 
The close contact of their processes with neurons and blood vessels suggest that protoplasmic astrocytes may help support the energy requirements of neurons. For example, distinctive processes of protoplasmic astrocytes called endfeet line the basal lamina of blood vessels. These endfeet appear to extract glucose from the blood and convert it to lactate which is then released for neurons to uptake and use as an energy substrate. The endfeet may also play a role in the regulation of cerebral blood flow (CBF) leading protoplasmic astrocytes to be referred to as a neurovascular bridge. In addition to these regulatory functions, protoplasmic astrocytes are involved in synaptic neurotransmission in two distinct ways. First, perisynaptic astrocytic processes express a variety of neurotransmitter receptors, and these receptors are stimulated by the release of neurotransmitters from presynaptic axon terminals. The activated glial cell then releases gliotransmitters that can stimulate the postsynaptic neuron. Thus, the perisynaptic astrocyte is an active partner in synaptic transmission, creating what has been termed the tripartite synapse. Second, neurotransmission is regulated by the structural network of astrocytes, which has been shown to comprise nonoverlapping domains of individual astrocytes. In the hippocampus and the cortex, individual astrocytes possess their own domain, with only their most distal processes interdigitating with processes of neighboring astrocytes. This pattern of organization creates distinct astrocytic domains, in which individual astrocytes modulate the activity of neurons and synapses. 

========123========

axon, and axon 
The 
principal 
axon 
is 
myelinated 
by neighboring 
FIGURE 1.2–1. Drawing of the major features of a typical neuron, oligodendrocyte, and astrocyte. A and B: The main features of neurons include a cell body, dendrites, a principal 
terminals. 
oligodendrocytes. C: Axon terminals branch off axons and form synapses with postsynaptic neurons via the release of neurotransmitters stored in synaptic vesicles. D: Fine astrocytic processes surround synapses and regulate neurotransmission, while astrocytic endfeet contact blood vessels and regulate blood flow. (Adapted from Gilman S, Winans-Newman S. Manter and Gatz’s Essentials of Clinical Neuroanatomy and Neurophysiology, 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis Co; 2003:2.) 
Table 1.2–1. 
Glial Cells 
Fibrous 
Astrocytes Location Contact neuronal 
cell bodies, 
dendrites, and 
axons in gray 
matter; form a 
complete lining 
around the 
Protoplasmic Astrocytes Organized 
​ 
along white matter tracts; endfeet contact blood 
Oligodendrocytes ​ Myelinating 
oligodendrocytes 
form myelin 
sheaths around 
CNS axons; 
satellite 
oligodendrocytes 
Schwann Cells Form myelin 
sheaths 
around 
myelinated 
axons and 
ensheath 
unmyelinated 
Microglia Gray and white 
matter of 
CNS 

========124========

external 
surfaces of the 
CNS and 
around CNS 
blood vessels Function Maintenance of 
extracellular 
ionic 
environment; 
secretion of 
gliotransmitters 
and growth 
factors; 
structural and 
metabolic 
support of 
neurons; 
regulation of 
blood flow 
Support of 
vessels, ependymal, axons, and nodes of Ranvier 
surround CNS neuronal cell bodies 
axons in white matter 
Myelinating 
oligodendrocytes 
—myelination; 
satellite 
oligodendrocytes 
—unknown 
axons 
Myelination; 
biochemical 
and 
structural 
support of 
myelinated 
and 
unmyelinated 
axons 
Scavenging and 
phagocytosis 
of debris 
after cell 
injury and 
death; 
secretion of 
cytokines 
Modified from Haines DE. Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2006:25. 
The cell bodies of fibrous astrocytes are evenly distributed within the white matter, and unlike protoplasmic astrocytes, their processes overlap. Some processes form endfeet that contact blood vessels, ependymal cells, axons, and nodes of Ranvier. Fibrous astrocytes appear to play the traditional supportive role of neuroglia. 
Oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells, found in the CNS and peripheral nervous system (PNS), respectively, are small cells that wrap their membranous processes around axons in a tight spiral. The resulting myelin sheath facilitates the conduction of action potentials along the axon. Satellite oligodendrocytes are found preferentially in gray matter and their perineuronal location suggests that they may be involved in the regulation of the environment surrounding neurons. 
The third class of glial cells, the microglia, is derived from macrophages and historically was thought to function solely as scavengers, eliminating the debris resulting from neuronal death and injury. However, studies on microglial function over the last decade have demonstrated that microglia also regulate neurogenesis and synaptic function. 
Alterations in glial cells may contribute to the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. For example, stereologic studies of postmortem human brain tissue have revealed decreases in glial cell number in the dorsal prefrontal cortex of individuals with schizophrenia and in the subgenual medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) in depressed individuals. Moreover, the decrease in CBF in the prefrontal cortex of individuals with depression may be linked to a reduction in the amount of blood vessel coverage by astrocytic endfeet. Although some putative susceptibility genes 

========125========

for schizophrenia are selectively expressed in glial cells, it is still unclear whether the alterations in glial cell number reflect the disease process or are a consequence of treating the disease. 
Architecture 
Neurons and their processes form groupings in many different ways, and these patterns of organization, or architecture, can be evaluated by several approaches. The pattern of distribution of nerve cell bodies, called cytoarchitecture, is revealed by aniline dyes called Nissl stains that stain ribonucleotides in the nuclei and the cytoplasm of neuronal cell bodies. The Nissl stains show the relative size and packing density of the neurons and, consequently, reveal the organization of the neurons into the different layers of the cerebral cortex. In certain pathologic states, such as Alzheimer disease (referred to as Major Neurocognitive Disorder due to Alzheimer type in the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [DSM-5]), neuronal degeneration and loss result in striking changes in the cytoarchitecture of some brain regions (Fig. 1.2–2). 
Other types of histologic techniques, such as silver stains, selectively label the myelin coating of axons and consequently reveal the myeloarchitecture of the brain. For example, certain regions of the cerebral cortex—such as area MT, a portion of the temporal cortex involved in processing visual information—can be identified by a characteristic pattern of heavy myelination in the deep cortical layers. The progression of myelination is highly region-specific, may not be complete for years after birth, and may be a useful anatomic indicator of the functional maturation of brain regions. 

========126========

FIGURE 1.2–2.Nissl-stainedsectionsofthesuperficiallayersoftheintermediateregion of human entorhinal cortex. A: In the control brain, layer II contains clusters or islands of large, intensely stained neurons. B: In Alzheimer disease, these layer II neurons are particularly vulnerable to degeneration, and their loss produces a marked change in the cytoarchitecture of the region. Roman numerals indicate the location of the cortical layers. Calibration bar (200 μm) applies to A and B. 
Immunohistochemical and other related techniques—which identify the location of neurotransmitters, their synthetic enzymes, or other molecules within neurons—can be used to determine the chemoarchitecture of the brain (Fig. 1.2–3B). In some cases, these techniques reveal striking regional differences in the chemoarchitecture of the brain that are difficult to detect in cytoarchitecture. 
Connections 
Every function of the human brain is a consequence of the activity of specific neural circuits. The circuits form as a result of several developmental processes. First, each neuron extends an axon, either after it 

========127========

has migrated to its final location or, in some cases, before. The growth of an axon along distinct pathways is guided by molecular cues from its environment and eventually leads to the formation of synapses with specific target neurons. Although the projection of axons is quite precise, some axons initially produce an excessive number of axon branches, or collaterals, and contact a broader set of targets than are present in the adult brain. During later adolescence, the connections of particular neurons are focused by the pruning or elimination of axonal projections to inappropriate targets. The developmental timing of synaptic and axonal elimination seems to be highly specific across regions of the brain. 
Within the adult brain, the connections among neurons or neural circuits follow several important principles of organization. First, many connections between brain regions are reciprocal, that is, each region tends to receive input from the regions to which it sends axonal projections. In some cases, the axons arising from one region may directly innervate the reciprocating projection neurons in another region; in other cases, local circuit interneurons are interposed between the incoming axons and the projection neurons that furnish the reciprocal connections. For some projections, the reciprocating connection is indirect, passing through one or more additional brain regions and synapses before innervating the initial brain region. In addition, connections within brain regions also display reciprocity. For example, in monkey prefrontal cortex, tract-tracing studies have shown that the axons and cell bodies of pyramidal neurons in layers II and III are arranged in a series of discrete stripes (Fig. 1.2–4). Reciprocity in this system is represented by the coregistration of anterogradely labeled axons and retrogradely labeled neurons within individual intrinsic and associational stripes. In addition, anterogradely labeled axon terminals form asymmetric synapses onto retrogradely labeled dendritic spines within individual stripes, providing further evidence of reciprocity in these connections. 

========128========

FIGURE 1.2–3. Adjacent sagittal sections through the medial temporal lobe of the human brain labeled to reveal the cytoarchitecture (A—Nissl stain) and chemoarchitecture (B—nonphosphorylated neurofilament protein immunoreactivity) of the entorhinal cortex. Letters indicate some of its subdivisions. Am, amygdala; HF, hippocampal formation. Calibration bar (2 mm) applies to both panels. (From Beall MJ, Lewis DA. Heterogeneity of layer II neurons in human entorhinal cortex. J Comp Neurol. 1992;321:241. Used with permission.) 
Second, many neuronal connections are either divergent or convergent in nature. A divergent system involves the conduct of information from one neuron or a discrete group of neurons to a much larger number of neurons that may be located in diverse portions of the brain. The locus coeruleus, a small group of norepinephrine-containing neurons in the brainstem that sends axonal projections to the entire cerebral cortex and other brain regions, is an example of a highly divergent system. In contrast, the output of multiple brain regions may be directed toward a single area, forming a convergent system. Projection from multiple association areas of the cerebral cortex to the entorhinal region of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) is an example of a convergent system. Connections within brain regions 

========129========

also display divergence and convergence (Fig. 1.2–4). For example, in monkey prefrontal cortex, pyramidal neurons within an individual stripe have axons that project to several other stripes (divergence), and individual stripes receive input from more than one stripe (convergence). The divergence in this system may provide an anatomic substrate that would allow a spatially restricted input to recruit a group of neurons whose coordinated activation is necessary to generate a particular response. Convergence in this system could allow information from different modalities present in the array of stripes to be relayed to a single location, facilitating the integration of their information content. 
FIGURE 1.2–4. Schematic drawing comparing the spatial organization of intrinsic and associational connections and the reciprocity, convergence, and divergence in these connections in monkey prefrontal cortex. (Adapted from Pucak ML, Levitt JB, Lund JS, Lewis DA. Patterns of intrinsic and associational circuitry in monkey prefrontal cortex. J Comp Neurol. 1996;376:614.) 
Third, the connections among regions may be organized in a hierarchical or parallel fashion, or both. Visual input is conveyed in a serial or hierarchical fashion through several populations of neurons in the retina to the lateral geniculate nucleus, to the primary visual cortex, and then, progressively, to the multiple visual association areas of the cerebral cortex. Within the hierarchical scheme, different types of visual information (e.g., motion and form) may be processed in a parallel fashion through different portions of the visual system. 
Finally, regions of the brain are specialized for different functions. Lesions of the left inferior frontal gyrus (Broca area) (Fig. 1.2–5) produce a characteristic impairment in speech production. However, speech is a complex faculty that depends not only on the integrity of Broca area but 

========130========

also on the distributed processing of information across numerous brain regions through divergent and convergent, serial and parallel interconnections. Thus, the role of any particular brain region or group of neurons in the production of specific behaviors or in the pathophysiology of a given neuropsychiatric disorder cannot be viewed in isolation, but must be considered within the context of the neural circuits connecting the neurons with other brain regions. 
FIGURE 1.2–5. Photographs of the lateral (top) and medial (bottom) aspects of the left hemisphere of a human brain indicating the location of major surface landmarks. F, frontal lobe; O, occipital lobe; P, parietal lobe; T, temporal lobe; Th, thalamus; ccG, genu of the corpus callosum; ccS, splenium of the corpus callosum. 

========131========

Distinctiveness of the Human Brain 
Compared with the brains of other primate species, the human brain is substantially greater in size, with certain areas expanded disproportionately. The prefrontal cortex has been estimated to occupy only 3.5 percent of the total cortical volume in cats and 11.5 percent in monkeys, but close to 30 percent of the much larger cortical volume of the human brain. Conversely, the relative representation of other regions is decreased in the human brain; for example, the primary visual cortex accounts for only 1.5 percent of the total area of the cerebral cortex in humans, but in monkeys a much greater proportion (17 percent) of the cerebral cortex is devoted to this region. Thus, the distinctiveness of the human brain is attributable to its size and to the differential expansion of certain regions, particularly the areas of the cerebral cortex devoted to higher cognitive functions. 
In addition, the expansion and differentiation of the human brain are associated with substantial differences in the organization of certain elements of neural circuitry. For example, compared with rodents, the dopaminergic innervation of the human cerebral cortex is much more widespread and regionally specific. The primary motor cortex and certain posterior parietal regions receive a dense dopamine innervation in monkeys and humans, but these areas receive little dopamine input in rats. The human brain is also distinctive at the cellular level, with greater relative percentages of certain neuronal and glial cells in the cerebral cortex. For example, the relative proportion of GABAergic interneurons is ~15 percent in rodent cerebral cortex but in humans, nearly 25 percent of all neurons in most cortical areas are GABAergic. Intralaminar and polarized astrocytes are found exclusively in humans and human protoplasmic astrocytes are larger and have more processes than their rodent counterparts. Furthermore, the astrocyte to neuron ratio is fivefold greater in humans compared to rodents, leading to greater astrocytic coverage of neurons and synapses and thus possibly enhanced regulation of neurotransmission in human cerebral cortex. These findings suggest a greater contribution of astrocytes in human, relative to rodent, brain function. 
These types of species differences indicate that there are limits to the accuracy of generalizations made concerning human brain function when using studies in rodents or even nonhuman primates (NHPs) as the basis for the inference. Direct investigation of the organization of the human brain, however, is obviously restricted and complicated by numerous factors. 
As indicated earlier, the expansion of the human brain is associated with the appearance of additional regions of the cerebral cortex. For example, the entorhinal cortex of the MTL in humans is sometimes 

========132========

considered to be a single cortical region, but the cytoarchitecture and chemoarchitecture of this cortex differ substantially along its rostral– caudal extent (Fig. 1.2–3). It is tempting to identify these regions by their location relative to other structures, but sufficient interindividual variability exists in the human brain to make such a topologic definition unreliable. In the case of the entorhinal cortex, the location of its different subdivisions relative to adjacent structures, such as the amygdala and the hippocampus, varies across human brains. Therefore, in all studies, particularly studies using the human brain, areas of interest must be defined in a manner (for example, using cyto-, chemo-, or myeloarchitectural features) that allows investigators to accurately identify the same region in all cases. 
An additional limitation to the study of the human brain concerns the changes in morphology and biochemistry that can occur during the interval between the time of death and the freezing or fixation of brain specimens. In addition to the influence of the known postmortem interval, such changes may begin to occur during the agonal state preceding death. When comparing aspects of the organization of the human brain with that of other species, the researcher must try to account for changes that may have occurred in the human brain as a result of postmortem delay or agonal state. In the study of disease states, appropriate controls must be used because differences in neurotransmitter content or other characteristics among cases could be a result of factors other than the disease state, such as methods of tissue preparation. Studies of the human brain in vivo— using such imaging techniques as positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)—circumvent many of these problems, but are limited by insufficient resolution for the study of many aspects of human brain organization. 
STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS 
Major Brain Structures 
In the early stages of human brain development, three primary vesicles can be identified in the neural tube: the prosencephalon, the mesencephalon, and the rhombencephalon (Fig. 1.2–6). Subsequently, the prosencephalon divides to become the telencephalon and the diencephalon. The telencephalon gives rise to the cerebral cortex, the hippocampal formation, the amygdala, and some components of the basal ganglia. The diencephalon becomes the thalamus, the hypothalamus, and several other related structures. The mesencephalon gives rise to the midbrain structures of the adult brain. The rhombencephalon divides into the metencephalon and the myelencephalon. The metencephalon gives rise to the pons and the cerebellum; the medulla is the derivative of the myelencephalon. 

========133========

The cerebral cortex of each hemisphere is divided into four major regions: the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes (Fig. 1.2–5). The frontal lobe is located anterior to the central sulcus and consists of the primary motor, premotor, and prefrontal regions (Fig. 1.2–7). The prefrontal cortex can be divided into dorsolateral and ventrolateral regions, with each of these regions having different functional properties. For example, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) seems to be more involved in the manipulation of data during working memory tasks than the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), which seems to be more involved with pure maintenance of information during working memory. The primary somatosensory cortex is located in the anterior parietal lobe; in addition, other cortical regions related to complex visual and somatosensory functions are located in the posterior parietal lobe. The superior portion of the temporal lobe contains the primary auditory cortex and other auditory regions; the inferior portion contains regions devoted to complex visual functions. In addition, some regions within the superior temporal sulcus receive a convergence of input from the visual, somatosensory, and auditory sensory areas. The occipital lobe consists of the primary visual cortex and other visual association areas. 
Beneath the outer mantle of the cerebral cortex are many other major brain structures, such as the caudate nucleus, the putamen, and the globus pallidus (Fig. 1.2–8). These structures are components of the basal ganglia, a system involved in the control of movement and certain cognitive processes. The hippocampus and the amygdala, components of the limbic system, are located deep in the medial temporal lobe (Figs. 1.2–9, 1.2–10, and 1.2–11). In addition, the derivatives of the diencephalon, such as the thalamus and the hypothalamus, are prominent internal structures; the thalamus is a relatively large structure composed of numerous nuclei that have distinct patterns of connectivity with the cerebral cortex (Figs. 1.2–9, 1.2–10, and 1.2–11). In contrast, the hypothalamus is a much smaller structure involved in autonomic and endocrine functions. 

========134========

FIGURE 1.2–6.Schematicrepresentation of the primary vesicles of the neural tube and their derivatives. 

========135========

FIGURE 1.2–7. Drawing of a coronal section just anterior to the genu of the corpus callosum of a human brain. The inset below indicates the level of the section. IFG, inferior frontal gyrus; MFG, middle frontal gyrus; PFC, prefrontal cortex; SFG, superior frontal gyrus. (Adapted from Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. The Human Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd ed. New York: Springer; 1988:68.) 

========136========

FIGURE 1.2–8.Drawingofacoronalsectionthroughtheopticchiasmofahumanbrain. The inset below indicates the level of the section. (Adapted from Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. The Human Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd ed. New York: Springer; 1988:70.) 
White Matter Tracts 
The cerebral hemispheres contain billions of myelinated axons or fibers, giving the white matter its characteristic color, which carry information to and from the cerebral cortex. These axons are bundled into white matter tracts that include projection, commissural, and associational fibers. 
Projection Fibers. Two of the major projection fiber systems comprise fibers that originate in the cerebral cortex and project to subcortical targets (corticofugal) and fibers that originate outside of the telencephalon and project to the cerebral cortex (corticopetal). Examples of these are the 

========137========

corticothalamic and thalamocortical projections, respectively. These projection fibers travel through the internal capsule, a compact bundle of fibers that is structurally associated with the thalamus and lenticular nucleus (i.e., the putamen and globus pallidus considered as one structure). In each cerebral hemisphere, the internal capsule is bordered laterally by the lenticular nucleus and medially by the thalamus and head of the caudate (Fig. 1.2–12). Other fiber systems, such as the corticopontine, corticospinal, and corticobulbar tracts, descend from the cortex through the internal capsule and cerebral peduncle to reach their destinations in the pons, spinal cord, and brainstem. All the fibers traveling through the internal capsule form the corona radiata, a fan-like structure that sits just above the internal capsule. 
The internal capsule has been divided into five regions with the name and location of each region based on its relationship with the lenticular nucleus. In addition, each region of the internal capsule contains different fiber systems. The anterior limb lies between the lenticular nucleus and the head of the caudate and carries frontopontine fibers and fibers interconnecting the thalamus and the frontal cortex. The posterior limb, the largest component, is located between the lenticular nucleus and the thalamus and conveys corticospinal fibers. The genu is the intersection of the anterior and posterior limbs and carries corticobulbar fibers. The retrolenticular limb lies behind or posterior to the lenticular nucleus, and fibers in this region of the internal capsule form the bulk of the optic radiation, the large group of fibers projecting from the lateral geniculate thalamic nucleus to the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe. The sublenticular limb lies inferior to the lenticular nucleus and contains fibers of the auditory radiation, a collection of fibers connecting the medial geniculate thalamic nucleus with primary auditory cortex in the temporal lobe. 

========138========

FIGURE 1.2–9. Drawing of a coronal section at the level of the mammillary bodies. The inset below indicates the level of the section. (Adapted from Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. The Human Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd ed. New York: Springer; 1988:72.) 
Commissural Fibers. Commissural fibers interconnect areas in the two cerebral hemispheres with each other. The two main commissural fiber systems are the corpus callosum and the anterior commissure. The corpus callosum is the largest fiber bundle in the brain, containing roughly 300 million axons. Most of these axons interconnect cortical regions in one lobe with homotopic (i.e., similarly placed) regions in the opposite lobe. However, heterotopic connections (i.e., those that link dissimilar cortical regions) are also carried in the corpus callosum. Almost all cortical regions are connected via the corpus callosum with the notable exceptions of the hand area of the motor and somatosensory cortices and all of the primary visual cortex except the portion representing areas adjacent to the vertical 

========139========

midline. 
The corpus callosum consists of five parts (Fig. 1.2–13). The corpus callosum starts at the rostrum and then curves anteriorly and dorsally to form the genu. The body of the corpus callosum is the largest part and gives way to the splenium, the enlarged, rounded posterior end. Sometimes the narrow portion of the corpus callosum between the body and the splenium is referred to as the isthmus. Axons carrying higher-order cognitive and sensory information from the prefrontal, temporal, and parietal cortices primarily travel through the genu and splenium, whereas visual, auditory, and somatosensory information is carried predominantly in the body and isthmus of the corpus callosum. 
FIGURE 1.2–10.Drawingofacoronalsectionthroughtheposteriorthalamus.Theinset below indicates the level of the section. (Adapted from Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. The Human Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd ed. New York: Springer; 1988:74.) 

========140========

The anterior commissure is a compact bundle of fibers that is caudal to the corpus callosum and crosses the midline in front of the fornix (Fig. 1.2– 8). The anterior commissure interconnects areas in the two temporal lobes and fibers from the anterior olfactory nucleus. Smaller commissural fiber tracts include the posterior commissure, which connects caudal portions of the diencephalon, and the hippocampal commissure, which interconnects the two hippocampal formations. 
Associational Fibers. Associational fibers connect cortical areas within a hemisphere and range in size from very short fibers that connect areas within the same lobe to longer fibers that connect areas within different lobes. Short association fibers connect adjacent gyri and are often called U fibers because they form a U connecting one gyrus to another gyrus (Fig. 1.2–14). There are five major tracts of long association fibers that connect distant cortical areas within the same hemisphere. The superior longitudinal fasciculus is located laterally within the hemisphere above the insula and connects frontal, parietal, and occipital cortices. The arcuate fasciculus interconnects the frontal and temporal lobes. The uncinate fasciculus is a curved fiber bundle that connects the orbital portion of the frontal lobe with the anterior region of the temporal lobe. As its name implies, the inferior occipitofrontal fasciculus connects the occipital and frontal lobe in a bundle of fibers that courses ventrally and laterally within the hemisphere. The cingulum lies within the white matter under the cingulate gyrus and connects this gyrus with the parahippocampal gyrus. The inferior longitudinal fasciculus connects the temporal and occipital lobes. These fiber bundles are not discrete, point-to-point pathways between cortical regions, but are continuous pathways with fibers entering and leaving all along their course. Other associational fiber bundles include the external capsule, which is sandwiched between the claustrum and the putamen, and the extreme capsule, which lies between the claustrum and the insular cortex (Fig. 1.2–8). 

========141========

FIGURE 1.2–11. Drawing of a coronal section through the cerebral hemispheres just posterior to the splenium of the corpus callosum and through the deep nuclei of the cerebellum. The inset below indicates the level of the section. (Adapted from Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. The Human Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd ed. New York: Springer; 1988:77.) 
Disturbances in the connectivity within and between hemispheres have been implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. For example, MRI studies of individuals with schizophrenia have revealed decreases in white matter density in the corpus callosum, internal capsule, and anterior commissure. In addition, studies using DTI, which provides information on the organization and microstructure of tissue, have shown abnormalities in 

========142========

almost every major white matter tract, including the corpus callosum, internal capsule, cingulum bundle, uncinate fasciculus, and fornix, in patients with schizophrenia, as well as altered microstructure in the corpus callosum and uncinate fasciculus in patients with depression. Abnormalities in white matter tracts have also been reported in other neuropsychiatric disorders. For example, MRI studies have revealed a reduction in the cross-sectional area of the corpus callosum in individuals with Alzheimer disease as well as in children with autism. 
FIGURE 1.2–12. A horizontal section through the cerebrum shows the location of the internal capsule fibers in relation to components of the basal ganglia and the corpus callosum. (From Snell RS. Clinical Neuroanatomy, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2010:xv.) 
Ventricular System 
As the neural tube fuses during development, the cavity of the neural tube becomes the ventricular system of the brain. It is composed of two C- shaped lateral ventricles in the cerebral hemispheres that can be divided further into five parts: the anterior horn (which is located in the frontal lobe), the body of the ventricle, the inferior or temporal horn in the temporal lobe, the posterior or occipital horn in the occipital lobe, and the atrium (Fig. 1.2–15). The foramina of Monro (interventricular foramina) are the two apertures that connect the two lateral ventricles with the third ventricle, which is found on the midline of the diencephalon. The cerebral aqueduct connects the third ventricle with the fourth ventricle in the pons and the medulla. 
The ventricular system is filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), a colorless liquid containing low concentrations of protein, glucose, and potassium and relatively high concentrations of sodium and chloride. Most 

========143========

(70 percent) of the CSF is produced at the choroid plexus located in the walls of the lateral ventricles and in the roof of the third and fourth ventricles. The choroid plexus is a complex of ependyma, pia, and capillaries that invaginate the ventricle. In contrast to other parts of the brain, the capillaries in the choroid plexus are fenestrated, which allows substances to pass out of the capillaries and through the pia mater. The ependymal or choroid epithelial cells, however, have tight junctions between cells to prevent the leakage of substances into the CSF; this provides what is sometimes referred to as the blood–CSF barrier. In other parts of the brain, the endothelial cells of the capillaries exhibit tight junctions that prevent the movement of substances from the blood to the brain; this is referred to as the BBB. 
FIGURE 1.2–13. Photograph of the medial view of the right cerebral hemisphere of a human brain illustrating the different parts of the corpus callosum. ccr, rostrum; ccg, genu; ccb, body; cci, isthmus; ccs, splenium. 
The CSF is constantly produced and circulates through the lateral ventricles to the third ventricle and then to the fourth ventricle. The CSF then flows through the medial and lateral apertures to the cisterna magna and pontine cistern and, finally, travels over the cerebral hemispheres to be absorbed by the arachnoid villi and released into the superior sagittal sinus. Disruptions in the flow of the CSF usually cause some form of hydrocephalus; for example, if an intraventricular foramen is occluded, the associated lateral ventricle becomes enlarged, but the remaining 

========144========

components of the ventricular system remain normal. 
Several functions are attributed to the CSF: it serves to cushion the brain against trauma, to maintain and control the extracellular environment, and to spread endocrine hormones. Because the CSF bathes the brain and is in direct communication with extracellular fluid, it is possible to measure the amount of certain compounds in the CSF as a correlate of the amount of that substance in the brain. For example, levels of homovanillic acid (HVA), a metabolite of the neurotransmitter dopamine, are thought to reflect the functional activity of that neurotransmitter. The concentration of HVA in samples of the CSF taken in a lumbar puncture may provide a picture of brain dopaminergic function. Because the CSF bathes the entire brain, however, the CSF levels of HVA may not be a valid indicator of the activity of dopamine neurons in any particular brain area. Consequently, caution must be exercised in interpreting the findings of investigations that rely on CSF measurements as indicators of neurotransmitter activity. 
FIGURE 1.2–14. Drawings illustrating the main associational fiber tracts as visualized from lateral (left panel) and medial (right panel) aspects of the left hemisphere. (Adapted from Haines DE. Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone; 2006:253.) 

========145========

Figure 1.2–15.A: Diagram of the ventricles of the brain and central canal of the spinal cord. B: A three-dimensional representation of the ventricles of the brain. (From Snell RS. Clinical Neuroanatomy, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2010:469.) 
FUNCTIONAL BRAIN SYSTEMS 
The relationships between the organizational principles and the structural components of the human brain are illustrated in three functional systems: the thalamocortical, basal ganglia, and limbic systems. 
Cerebral Cortex 
The cerebral cortex is a laminated sheet of neurons, several millimeters thick, that covers the cerebral hemispheres. It consists of approximately 22.5 billion neurons communicating via approximately 165 trillion 

========146========

synapses. These neurons have approximately 12 million kilometers of dendrites, and the cerebral cortex and subcortical regions are interconnected by approximately 100,000 km of axons. More than 90 percent of the total cortical area consists of the neocortex, which has a six- layered structure (at least at some point during development). The remainder of the cerebral cortex is referred to as the allocortex and consists of the paleocortex and the archicortex, regions that are restricted to the base of the telencephalon and the hippocampal formation, respectively. 
Within the neocortex, the two major neuronal cell types are the pyramidal and stellate, or nonpyramidal, neurons (Fig. 1.2–16). Pyramidal neurons, which account for approximately 70 percent of all neocortical neurons, usually have a characteristically shaped cell body that gives rise to a single apical dendrite that ascends vertically toward the cortical surface. In addition, the neurons have an array of short dendrites that spread laterally from the base of the cell. The dendrites of pyramidal neurons are coated with short protrusions, called spines, which are the sites of most of the excitatory synapses to these neurons (Fig. 1.2–17). Most pyramidal cells are projection neurons that are thought to use excitatory amino acids as neurotransmitters. Interestingly, in postmortem studies, subjects with schizophrenia appear to have fewer spines on the dendrites located at the base of pyramidal neurons in deep layer III of the prefrontal cortex. 

========147========

FIGURE 1.2–16. Drawings of a stellate neuron (left) and a pyramidal neuron (right). Note the difference in the morphology of these two types of neurons. The soma of stellate cells tends to be round or ovoid, whereas that of pyramidal neurons generally appears triangular from a two-dimensional perspective. Also, note the difference in the dendritic and axonal arbors between the two cells. The processes arising from the stellate cell appear to branch in multiple directions, whereas the pyramidal neuron has prominent, well- defined apical and basilar dendrites. Note the small protuberances visible on the apical and basilar dendrites; these are dendritic spines. (Adapted from Bear MF, Connors BW, Paradiso MA. Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001:45.) 

========148========

FIGURE 1.2–17. Dendritic spines in the cerebral cortex. A: Diagram of a cortical pyramidal neuron illustrating the location of dendritic spines. B: Electron micrograph from monkey prefrontal cortex showing two dendritic spines (Sp) emanating from a single dendrite (D), both of which receive an asymmetric synapse from an axon terminal (at). Calibration bar = 200 nm. 
In contrast, nonpyramidal cells are generally small, local circuit neurons, many of which use the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA (Fig. 1.2–18). Also known as interneurons, the axons of cortical GABA cells arborize within the gray matter and do not project out of the cortical region in which they reside. Twelve different subtypes of GABA neurons can be found in the cortex, and these can be distinguished biochemically, electrophysiologically, and morphologically. For example, subpopulations of GABA cells can be distinguished by the presence of certain neuropeptides or calcium-binding proteins. In addition, the organization of the axonal arbor and synaptic targets of the axon terminals differ greatly across these different subtypes. As depicted in Figure 1.2–18, the chandelier class of GABA cell expresses the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin and has axon terminals that are arrayed as distinct vertical structures termed cartridges (Fig. 1.2–19). These axon terminals form inhibitory or symmetric synapses exclusively with the axon initial segments of pyramidal cells. Parvalbumin-containing basket neurons form symmetric synapses onto the cell bodies and dendrites of pyramidal neurons. Parvalbumin-containing neurons are predominantly located in layers III and IV. In contrast, the Martinotti class of GABA neurons contain the neuropeptide somatostatin and form symmetric synapses onto the tuft dendrites of pyramidal neurons. Some double-bouquet GABA neurons have radially oriented axonal arbors, contain somatostatin and the calcium- binding protein calbindin, and form symmetric synapses onto the distal 

========149========

dendritic shafts and spines of pyramidal neurons. The neuropeptide cholecystokinin (CCK) is present in a separate population of basket cells which also express the brain cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1). These CCK/CB1 basket cells predominantly synapse onto the dendritic shafts and cell bodies of pyramidal neurons. In contrast, the calcium-binding protein, calretinin-containing double-bouquet cells form symmetric synapses predominantly onto the dendritic shafts of other GABA neurons. Calretinin-containing Cajal–Retzius cells reside solely in layer I and target the tuft dendrites of pyramidal neurons. 
FIGURE 1.2–18. Schematic drawing of different morphologic subclasses of GABA- containing local circuit neurons in the primate prefrontal cortex. The axons of neurons in these subclasses selectively target different portions of pyramidal neurons. (Adapted from 

========150========

Gonzalez-Burgos ​ G, Hashimoto T, Lewis DA. Inhibition and timing in cortical neural circuits. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164:12.) 
Many studies have revealed abnormalities in populations of nonpyramidal neurons in a variety of neurological and psychiatric disorders. For example, reduced numbers of calretinin neurons and morphological changes in the axonal arbors of parvalbumin neurons have been reported in epileptic tissue. In schizophrenia, basket cells express lower levels of parvalbumin and the 67-kDa form of the biosynthetic enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD67). The axon terminals of chandelier neurons have reduced levels of the membrane GABA transporter 1 (GAT1) and greater levels of GABAA α2-receptors in postsynaptic pyramidal neurons (Fig. 1.2–19C). In concert, these findings reflect dysfunctional prefrontal cortical circuitry which may contribute to the cognitive symptoms observed in schizophrenia. 
Neocortical neurons are distributed across six layers of the neocortex; these layers are distinguished by the relative size and packing density of their neurons (Fig. 1.2–20). Each cortical layer tends to receive particular types of inputs and furnish characteristic projections. For example, afferents from thalamic relay nuclei terminate primarily in deep layer III and layer IV, whereas corticothalamic projections originate mainly from layer VI pyramidal neurons (Fig. 1.2–21). These laminar distinctions provide important clues for dissecting possible pathophysiologic mechanisms in psychiatric disorders. Reports of decreased somal size and diminished spine density on deep layer III pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal cortex of schizophrenic patients suggest that these changes may be related to abnormalities in afferent projections from the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus. Consistent with this interpretation, the number of neurons in the medial dorsal nucleus has been reported to be decreased in schizophrenic patients. 

========151========

FIGURE 1.2–19. A: Brightfield photomicrograph of chandelier neuron axon terminal (arrow) immunostained for the GABA transporter-type 1 (GAT-1). B: Brightfield photomicrograph of a pyramidal neuron (P) axon initial segment (the site of action potential generation) immunostained for the α2 subunit of the GABAA receptor. C: Schematic diagram of the synaptic relationship between chandelier and pyramidal neurons illustrating the pre- and postsynaptic changes in schizophrenia. (Adapted from Volk DW, Pierri JN, Fritschy J-N, Auh S, Sampson AR, Lewis DA. Reciprocal alterations in pre- and postsynaptic inhibitory markers at chandelier cell inputs to pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia. Cereb Cortex. 2002;12:1063.) 
In addition to the horizontal laminar structure, many aspects of cortical organization have a vertical or columnar characteristic. For example, the apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons and the axons of some local circuit neurons have a prominent vertical orientation, indicating that these neural elements may sample the input to, or regulate the function of, neurons in multiple layers, respectively. Afferent inputs to the neocortex from other cortical regions also tend to be distributed across cortical layers in a columnar fashion. Finally, physiological studies in the somatosensory and visual cortices have shown that neurons in a given column respond to stimuli with particular characteristics, whereas neurons in adjacent columns respond to stimuli with different features. 
FIGURE 1.2–20. Nissl-stained sections of Brodmann area 46 (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) (A), area 4 (primary motor cortex) (B), area 41 (primary auditory cortex) (C), and area 17 (primary visual cortex) (D) from a control human brain. Note the marked differences in the size and laminar organization of neurons across areas. The large neurons in panel B are Betz cells, which extend their axons to the spinal cord. Roman numerals indicate the cortical layers. Calibration bar (200 μm) applies to A–D. 

========152========

FIGURE 1.2–21. Schematic diagram of the laminar origins of efferent projections from the cerebral cortex. These data are mainly derived from the study of monkeys via tract- tracing studies. Parentheses indicate projections that may not arise from the identified layer in all species or in all cortical areas. Note that afferents from the thalamus project mainly to the lower half of layers III and IV. (Adapted from Jones EG. Laminar distribution of cortical efferent cells. In: Peters A, Jones EG, eds. Cerebral Cortex: Cellular Components of the Cerebral Cortex. Vol 1. New York: Plenum Press; 1984:535.) 
Although best studied in sensory cortices, this pattern of organization is also present in association cortices. More recent studies in monkeys using tract-tracing techniques have shown that clusters of prefrontal cortical neurons are organized into reciprocally connected, discrete modular stripes that appear to be the analog of columns identified in the visual cortex (Fig. 1.2–4). It has been hypothesized that this organization may subserve prefrontal working memory and executive functions. 
The neocortex can be divided into two general types of regions. Regions 

========153========

with a readily identifiable six-layer appearance are known as the homotypical cortex, and are found in association regions of the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes. In contrast, some regions of the neocortex do not have a six-layer appearance. These regions, referred to as the heterotypical cortex, include the primary motor cortex, which lacks a defined layer IV, and primary sensory regions, which exhibit an expanded layer IV. The neocortex can be divided further into discrete areas, each area having a distinctive architecture, certain set of connections, and role in particular brain functions. Most subdivisions of the human neocortex have been based on cytoarchitectural features; that is, subdivisions differ in the size, packing density, and arrangement of neurons across layers (Fig. 1.2– 20). The most widely used system is that of Korbinian Brodmann (Fig. 1.2– 22), who divided the cortex of each hemisphere into 44 numbered areas. Some of these numbered regions correspond closely to functionally distinct areas, such as area 4 (primary motor cortex in the precentral gyrus) and area 17 (primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe). In contrast, other Brodmann areas appear to encompass several cortical zones that differ in their functional attributes. Although Brodmann brain map has been used extensively in postmortem studies of psychiatric disorders, many of the distinctions among regions are subtle, and the locations of the boundaries between regions vary across individuals. 
FIGURE 1.2–22. Drawing of the lateral view (A) and medial view (B) of the cytoarchitectonic subdivisions of the human brain as determined by Brodmann. 
Although a given cortical area may receive other inputs, it is heavily innervated by projections from particular thalamic nuclei and from certain other cortical regions either in the same hemisphere (associational fibers) or the opposite hemisphere (commissural fibers). The patterns of connectivity make it possible to classify cortical regions into different types. Primary sensory areas are dominated by inputs from specific thalamic relay nuclei and are characterized by a topographic representation of visual space, the body surface, or the range of audible frequencies on the cortical surface of the primary visual, primary somatosensory, and primary auditory cortices. These regions project to nearby unimodal association 

========154========

regions, which are also devoted to processing information from a particular sensory modality. Output from these regions converges in multimodal association areas, such as the prefrontal cortex or the temporoparietal cortical regions. Neurons in these regions respond to complex stimuli and are thought to be mediators of higher cognitive functions. Finally, these regions influence the activity of the motor areas of the cerebral cortex that control behavioral responses. 
Although this classification scheme of cortical regions is accurate in many respects, it fails to account for some of the known complexities of cortical information processing. For example, somatosensory input from the thalamus projects to several distinct topographically organized maps in the cerebral cortex. In addition, information flow within the cortex is not confined to the serial processing route implied in the classification scheme, but also involves parallel processing streams, such as sensory input from the thalamus to the primary and the association areas. 
Although this discussion has not distinguished between the cerebral hemispheres, certain brain functions, such as language, are localized to one hemisphere. The structural bases for the lateralization of function have not been determined, but some anatomical differences between the cerebral hemispheres have been observed. For example, a portion of the superior temporal cortex, called the planum temporale, is generally larger in the left hemisphere than in the right hemisphere. That cortical area, which is located close to the primary auditory cortex and includes the region known as Wernicke area (Fig. 1.2–5), seems to be involved in receptive language functions that are localized to the left hemisphere. In addition, Brodmann area 44 in the left inferior frontal cortex (Broca area) (Fig. 1.2–5) contains larger pyramidal neurons than the homotopic region of the right hemisphere, a difference that may contribute to the specialization of Broca area for motor speech function. A lesion in Broca area causes broken speech, whereas a lesion in Wernicke area causes wordy speech that does not make sense. 
Functional Circuitry 
CORTICOCORTICAL CONNECTIONS. Corticocortical connec​tions comprise the majority of connections within the cerebral cortex and can be divided into three basic categories: (1) intrinsic—c​onnections within one cortical area, (2) associational—connections between cortical areas within the same hemisphere, and (3) callosal—connections between cortical areas in different hemispheres. Intrinsic connections are formed by the axon collaterals of pyramidal neurons, whereas associational and callosal connections are formed by the principal axons of pyramidal neurons. 
Corticocortical connections are responsible for the coordinated activity of large groups of neurons distributed within and across cortical areas. The 

========155========

synchronization of this activity appears to be involved in the majority of perceptual and cognitive functions ascribed to the cerebral cortex. 
The synchronous neural activity or oscillations of these connected groups of neurons generates characteristic patterns of electrical activity that can be recorded with an electroencephalogram (EEG). The greater the number of neurons oscillating together at a particular frequency, the more the amplitude of the EEG signal increases above background noise. These oscillations are grouped into different frequency bands such as θ (4 to 8 Hz), α (8 to 12 Hz), and γ (30 to 80 Hz). Oscillatory activity in all frequency bands is thought to arise from networks of inhibitory, GABAergic neurons whose output modulates the activity of pyramidal neurons. 
High-frequency oscillations have been suggested as a possible mechanism for the integration of distributed neuronal networks involved in a variety of mental processes such as perception, attention, and cognition. γ-Band oscillations in the DLPFC are thought to be a key neural substrate for cognition. Moreover, the synaptic connections between the parvalbumin basket subclass of GABA neurons and pyramidal neurons (Fig. 1.2–18) in the dorsolateral prefrontal appear to generate this oscillatory activity. Interestingly, individuals with schizophrenia exhibit lower power of γ-oscillations recorded from the DLPFC when performing cognitive tasks, perhaps a consequence of the abnormalities in the GABAergic system, including PV neurons, observed in postmortem DLPFC from individuals with schizophrenia. 
NETWORKS OF CORTICOCORTICAL CIRCUITRY. The study of corticocortical connections had once only been possible in animals with the use of tract- tracing methods. Although improvements in these methods have refined and deepened our knowledge of the projections between different cortical areas, the connections revealed by this methodology can only be inferred to be the same in humans. Over the last 20 years neuroimaging studies have vastly expanded our knowledge of corticocortical connectivity in humans. However, it is important to note that most of these neuroimaging studies have identified functional connectivity (i.e., brain areas that are coactivated during a specific task) and not physical connections between regions. Evidence of direct anatomical corticocortical connections in the human brain is sparse, although newer imaging techniques such as DTI do provide some structural detail. Large-scale cortical networks linking distributed areas that subserve particular functions, such as attention or memory, have long been suggested and are now more readily studied with the aforementioned neuroimaging techniques. Numerous networks have been described, but three particular networks have received the greatest focus. 
The central executive network includes the DLPFC (Fig. 1.2–7) and multiple areas of lateral posterior parietal cortex (1.2–5) and is involved in certain cognitive functions such as attention, working memory, and 

========156========

decision making (Table 1.2–2). The salience network, comprised of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) (Fig. 1.2–5), the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) (Fig. 1.2–7), and the insula (Figs. 1.2–8 and 1.2–9), responds to the degree of salience of incoming cognitive, homeostatic, or emotional information (Table 1.2–2). Perhaps the most intriguing network that has been described is the default mode network, which is formed by the medial prefrontal cortex (Fig. 1.2–5), posterior cingulate cortex (Fig. 1.2–5), and medial areas of posterior parietal cortex (Fig. 1.2–5). The brain regions of the default mode network are active when a person is at rest and not engaged in an externally cued task, leading researchers to hypothesize that this network is involved in internal modes of cognition including recall of personal experiences, envisioning the future and theory of mind (Table 1.2–2). Recent studies suggest that these three networks interact, with the salience network acting as a switch between the task-positive central executive network and the task-​negative default mode network. The frontoinsular region of the salience network appears to play a key role in switching between the default mode and central executive networks. Interestingly, the human-specific von Economo class of neurons is found exclusively in the frontoinsular cortex and it has been suggested that these neurons are responsible for the switching capability of the salience network. 
Table 1.2–2. 
Functional Networks in Cerebral Cortex Network Brain Areas Involved 
Central executive Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
Lateral posterior parietal cortex 
Salience 
Anterior cingulate cortex Ventromedial prefrontal cortex Insula 
Medial prefrontal cortex Posterior cingulate cortex Medial posterior parietal cortex 
Function 
Attention 
Working memory 
Decision making 
Detection of relevant incoming stimuli 
Default 
Internal cognition Theory of mind 
Given that these networks are involved in the processing of cognitive and emotional information, it is not surprising that their dysfunction has been implicated in a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders. For example, individuals with depression have abnormally high functional connectivity within the default mode network and reduced connectivity among regions involved in the central executive network. In schizophrenia, the functional connectivity across the default mode, central executive and salience networks is less organized. In particular, salience network dysfunction, perhaps driven by gray matter reduction in the insula and/or anterior cingulate, results in an imbalance between the default mode and central 

========157========

executive networks. This breakdown in network connectivity may lead to a disruption in the capability to distinguish between the external world and internal thoughts and feelings, manifested as psychotic symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations. 
Thalamus 
The largest portion of the diencephalon consists of the thalamus, a group of nuclei located medial to the basal ganglia that serves as the major synaptic relay station for the information reaching the cerebral cortex. On an anatomic basis, the thalamic nuclei can be divided into six groups: anterior, medial, lateral, reticular, intralaminar, and midline nuclei (Fig. 1.2–23). A thin Y-shaped sheet of myelinated fibers, the internal medullary lamina, delimits the anterior, medial, and lateral groups of nuclei. In the human thalamus, the anterior and medial groups each contain a single large nucleus, the anterior and medial dorsal nuclei. The lateral group of nuclei can be subdivided further into dorsal and ventral tiers. The dorsal tier is composed of the lateral dorsal, the lateral posterior, and the pulvinar nuclei; the ventral tier consists of the ventral anterior, the ventral lateral, the ventral posterior lateral, and the ventral posterior medial nuclei. The lateral group of nuclei is covered by the external medullary lamina, another sheet of myelinated fibers. Interposed between these fibers and the internal capsule is a thin group of neurons forming the reticular nucleus of the thalamus. The intralaminar nuclei, the largest of which is the central median nucleus, are located within the internal medullary lamina. The final group of thalamic nuclei, the midline nuclei, covers portions of the medial surface of the thalamus. The midline nuclei of each hemisphere may fuse to form the interthalamic adhesion, which is variably present. 
Thalamic nuclei also can be classified into several groups based on the pattern and information content of their connections (Table 1.2–3). Relay nuclei project to and receive input from specific regions of the cerebral cortex. These reciprocal connections apparently allow the cerebral cortex to modulate the thalamic input it receives. Specific relay nuclei process input either from a single sensory modality or from a distinct part of the motor system. For example, the lateral geniculate nucleus receives visual input from the optic tract and projects to the primary visual area of the occipital cortex. As summarized in Figure 1.2–24, neurons of the thalamic relay nuclei furnish topographically organized projections to specific regions of the cerebral cortex, although some cortical regions receive input from more than one nucleus. 

========158========

FIGURE 1.2–23. Exploded view of the dorsal thalamus illustrating the organization of thalamic nuclei. (Reprinted from Haines DE. Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone; 2006:236.) 
In contrast, association relay nuclei receive highly processed input from more than one source and project to larger areas of the association cortex. For example, the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus receives input from the hypothalamus and the amygdala and is reciprocally interconnected with the prefrontal cortex and certain premotor and temporal cortical regions (Fig. 1.2–25). In contrast to relay nuclei, diffuse- projection nuclei receive input from diverse sources and project to widespread areas of the cerebral cortex and to the thalamus. The divergent nature of the cortical connections of these nuclei indicates that they may be involved in regulating the level of cortical excitability and arousal. Finally, the reticular nucleus is unique in that it contains inhibitory neurons that receive input from collaterals of the axons that reciprocally connect other thalamic nuclei and the cerebral cortex. Each portion of the reticular nucleus then projects to the thalamic nucleus from which it receives input. The pattern of connectivity indicates that the reticular nucleus samples cortical afferent and efferent activity and then uses that information to regulate thalamic function. 

========159========

Table 1.2–3. 
Connections of Thalamic Nucleia 
Principal Afferent Inputs 
Type Specific relay 
Mammillary body of hypothalamus 
Globus pallidus 
Dentate nucleus of cerebellum 
Association 
relay 
Nuclei Anterior Ventral anterior Ventral lateral Ventral posterior 
lateral Ventral posterior 
medial Medial 
geniculate Lateral 
geniculate Lateral dorsal 
Lateral posterior Pulvinar 
Medial lemniscal and spinothalamic 
pathways 
Sensory nuclei of trigeminal nerve 
Inferior colliculus 
Optic tract 
Unknown 
Superior colliculus Superior colliculus 
Amygdala and hypothalamus 
Major Projection Sites Cingulate cortex Premotor cortex Motor, premotor cortices Somatosensory cortex 
Somatosensory cortex 
Auditory cortex 
Visual cortex 
Cingulate cortex 
Diffuse- 
projection 
Medial dorsal Midline 
Reticular formation, hypothalamus 
Parietal cortex Temporal, parietal, 
occipital cortices Prefrontal cortex Basal forebrain, cortex 
Intralaminar 
Reticular 
Reticular formation, spinothalamic 
tract, globus pallidus Cerebral cortex, thalamus 
Basal ganglia, cortex 
Thalamus 
aThis 
table does not include the cortical inputs to each thalamic nucleus. 
Modified from Kelly JP. The neutral basis of perception and movement. In: Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM, eds. Principles of Neural Science, 3rd ed. New York: Elsevier; 1991:291. 

========160========

FIGURE 1.2–24. Schematic drawings of the lateral (upper left) and medial (upper right) surfaces of the right cerebral hemisphere and the right thalamus (lower). Each thalamic nucleus is patterned coded to match its target area in the cerebral cortex. (Adapted from Haines DE. Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone; 2006:237.) 
The classification of thalamic nuclei into different categories has been refined over the last 20 years to reflect our greater understanding of thalamic circuitry. Although classification into different nuclei is useful, focus has shifted to the type of inputs to the various nuclei. For example, thalamic afferents can be defined as either drivers or modulators. Drivers convey information from the senses and periphery that are then relayed to cerebral cortex. These inputs determine the nature of the thalamic relay. For example, the lateral geniculate nucleus is a visual relay because it transmits retinal input to primary visual cortex. The driver inputs for association and diffuse-projection nuclei are more difficult to determine, but these inputs most likely arise from layer V pyramidal neurons in the cerebral cortex. Modulators include all other inputs to the thalamus, such as monoaminergic and cholinergic projections from brainstem nuclei. Modulator inputs also include the feedback projections from layer VI pyramidal neurons in the cerebral cortex. Thalamic circuits can then be distinguished based on the source of driver inputs. First-order relays have drivers that arise from ascending pathways and transmit information that has not yet been processed in the cortex. In contrast, higher-order relays have drivers that arise from layer V pyramidal neurons, allowing for transmission of information from one cortical area to another via the thalamus. Thus, it is possible that a given thalamic nucleus contains both 

========161========

first-order and higher-order relays. Interestingly, over half of the circuits in the thalamic nuclei of primates are considered to be of higher order, suggesting a more complex role of the thalamus in cortico-thalamo-cortical function. 
Functional Circuitry. The connections between the thalamus, the cortex, and certain related brain structures constitute three types of thalamocortical systems, each with different patterns of functional circuitry. These three systems—sensory, motor, and association systems— are described separately here, but are heavily interconnected. 
THALAMOCORTICAL SENSORY SYSTEMS. Several general principles govern the organization of the thalamocortical sensory systems. First, sensory receptors transduce certain stimuli in the external environment to neural impulses. The impulses ascend, often through intermediate nuclei in the spinal cord and the medulla, and ultimately synapse in specific relay nuclei of the thalamus. 
Second, projections from peripheral sensory receptors to the thalamus and the cortex exhibit topography, that is, a particular portion of the external world is mapped onto a particular region of the brain. For example, in the somatosensory system, axons carrying information regarding a distinct part of the body synapse in a discrete part of the ventral posterior nucleus of the thalamus. Specifically, the ventral posterior medial nucleus receives inputs regarding the head, and the ventral posterior lateral nucleus receives inputs regarding the remainder of the body. The nuclei project topographically to the primary somatosensory cortex, where several representations of the contralateral half of the body can be found. These representations are distorted; regions heavily innervated by sensory receptors, such as the fingers, are disproportionately represented in the primary somatosensory cortex. 

========162========

FIGURE 1.2–25.Drawingofthethalamusshowingthepathwayofprojectionsfromthe mediodorsal nucleus through lateral thalamic nuclei to the prefrontal cortex. Also shown are afferents from the amygdala to the medial dorsal nucleus. The inset shows the thalamus embedded in the limbic system of which it is a key component. (Adapted from Hendelman WJ. Student’s Atlas of Neuroanatomy. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1994:199.) 
Third, in some cases, sensory inputs travel to the thalamus in a segregated manner according to the submodality of the information conveyed. The inputs are processed in a parallel fashion; particular pathways may be devoted exclusively to processing a submodality. An example of such segregation is evident in the somatosensory system (Fig. 1.2–26), where most fibers carrying tactile and proprioceptive information travel in the medial lemniscus, whereas fibers carrying pain and temperature information travel in the spinothalamic tract to the ventral posterior thalamic nuclei. Although some tactile information is carried in the spinothalamic tract, the submodalities of pain and temperature are largely segregated from tactile and proprioceptive inputs as they ascend to the thalamus. 
Finally, sensory pathways exhibit convergence, that is, primary sensory areas process sensory information and project to unimodal association areas. Subsequently, the unimodal areas project to and converge in multimodal associational areas. Convergence in sensory pathways is illustrated in the somatosensory system. The primary somatosensory cortex, located in the anterior parietal lobe, has been divided into four regions on the basis of cytoarchitecture. Each of the cytoarchitectonic regions—numbered 1, 2, 3a, and 3b by Brodmann—contains a 

========163========

topographical representation of the body. The regions are heavily interconnected, and all project to the next level of somatosensory processing in area S-II (Brodmann areas 40 and 43). This type of projection, from one level of processing to a more advanced level, is termed a feedforward projection. The reciprocal connection, from the more advanced processing level back to the simpler level, is called a feedback projection. Both projections have distinct patterns of laminar termination: feedforward projections originate in the superficial layers of cortex (layer III) and terminate in layer IV; feedback projections originate in layers III, V, and VI, and terminate outside layer IV. Further processing of somatosensory information occurs in higher-order somatosensory areas, such as area 7b of the posterior parietal cortex, which receives feedforward projections from S-II. Lesions of the posterior parietal cortex reflect the complexity of the information processed there; after a person has sustained a posterior parietal lesion, the ability to understand the significance of sensory stimuli is impaired, and extreme cases result in contralateral sensory neglect and inattention. 
THALAMOCORTICAL MOTOR SYSTEMS. The thalamocortical motor systems exhibit some unique organizational principles, but also share many of the features present in the sensory systems. First, in contrast to sensory systems, which primarily ascend from sensory receptor to cortical association areas, motor systems descend from association and motor regions of the cortex to the brainstem and the spinal cord. The corticospinal tract originates in the large Betz cells of layer V in the premotor and primary motor cortices (Fig. 1.2–20B) of the frontal lobe and terminates in the spinal cord to influence motor behavior. 
Second, motor systems exhibit strong topography at the thalamic and cortical levels. The corticospinal tract is organized so that a topographical representation of the contralateral half of the body is evident in the primary motor and premotor cortices. The representation of the body is disproportionate, with large regions of the motor cortex devoted to areas of the body involved in fine movement, such as the face and the hands. 

========164========

FIGURE 1.2–26. Pathway of somatosensory information processing. (Adapted from Patestas MA, Gartner LP. A Textbook of Neuroanatomy. Malden, MA: Blackwell; 2006:149.) 
Finally, there is a convergence of projections from several sensory association regions to the motor regions of the frontal cortex. The premotor cortex receives a convergence of afferents from higher-order somatosensory and visual areas of the posterior parietal cortex, whereas afferents from the primary somatosensory cortex converge on the primary motor cortex. In addition to cortical input, the primary motor cortex receives afferents from the ventral lateral nucleus of the thalamus; this 

========165========

nucleus receives afferents predominantly from the cerebellum. The premotor cortex receives input from the ventral anterior thalamic nucleus, which receives much of its input from the globus pallidus. 
THALAMOCORTICAL ASSOCIATION SYSTEMS. The multimodal association areas of the cortex are organized according to several general principles. First, association regions receive a convergence of input from a variety of sources, including unimodal and multimodal association regions of the cortex, association nuclei of the thalamus, and other structures. The prefrontal cortex receives afferents from higher-order sensory cortices of the parietal and temporal lobes, the contralateral prefrontal cortex, the cingulate cortex of the limbic system, the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus (an association relay nucleus), and portions of the amygdala. The medial dorsal nucleus receives highly processed inputs from many sources, including some regions, such as the amygdala, hippocampus, and hypothalamus, that project directly to the prefrontal cortex. The redundant (direct and indirect) projections may serve to attach additional significance to certain inputs received by the prefrontal cortex. The significance of these inputs may also be influenced by their temporal and spatial coincidence with modulatory inputs from brainstem nuclei that use the monoamine neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine, or serotonin. These monoamine systems project broadly to the cerebral cortex, although with substantial regional differences in density (Fig. 1.2–27). In addition, the innervation density in the cerebral cortex is typically much lower than in some subcortical areas. 

========166========

FIGURE 1.2–27. Darkfield photomicrograph of a coronal section through a hemisphere of a macaque monkey immunolabeled for the dopamine transporter. This image illustrates the differential distribution of dopamine-containing axons in different regions of the brain. The brighter the image, the greater the quantity of dopamine-containing axons. Dopamine- rich areas such as the caudate (Cd), putamen (Pt), ventral tegmental area (VTA), and the substantia nigra (SNc and SNr) appear white, whereas dopamine innervation of the cortex and thalamus, although clearly seen, is less dense and varies by the specific cortical and thalamic region. CgS, cingulate sulcus; CS, central sulcus; DG, dentate gyrus; LS, lateral sulcus; STS, superior temporal sulcus; Th, thalamus. Calibration bar = 2 mm. (From Lewis DA, Melchitzky DS, Sesack SR, Whitehead RE, Auh S, Sampson A. Dopamine transporter immunoreactivity in monkey cerebral cortex: Regional, laminar and ultrastructural localization. J Comp Neurol. 2001;432(1):119. Used with permission.) 
The second way that the projections are organized is according to 

========167========

topography. The projections that terminate in multimodal association regions exhibit a topographic organization. Different cytoarchitectonic regions of the medial dorsal nucleus project to discrete regions of the prefrontal cortex. In addition, some cortical afferents received by the prefrontal cortex are topographically organized; certain regions of the prefrontal cortex predominantly receive highly processed information from one modality. 
The patterns of connectivity are clearly related to some of the functional characteristics attributed to the prefrontal cortex. For example, in monkeys, lesions of the DLPFC consistently produce impairments in a monkey’s ability to perform spatial delayed-response tasks. These tasks require that monkeys maintain a spatial representation of the location of an object during a delay period in which the object is out of sight; it has been suggested that the prefrontal cortex plays a role in maintaining the spatial representation of the object. Such a function would require that the prefrontal cortex receive information regarding the location of objects in space, and the DLPFC is innervated by afferents from association regions of the parietal cortex that convey such information. Although the DLPFC is necessary for the performance of delayed-response tasks in monkeys, it is insufficient for the performance of the task. For example, lesions of the medial dorsal nucleus in monkeys result in similar impairments on the performance of spatial delayed-response tasks. The functions attributed to the prefrontal cortex are a result of the neural circuitry involving the region. 
Knowledge of the integration of afferent inputs into the neural circuitry of certain prefrontal regions may also be important for understanding the nature of prefrontal cortical dysfunction in schizophrenia. Individuals with schizophrenia perform poorly on tasks that are known to be mediated by the prefrontal cortex. These findings have been correlated with other measures to suggest, albeit indirectly, that the dopamine projections to the prefrontal cortex are impaired in schizophrenia. Studies in NHPs have shown that performance of delayed-response tasks that require working memory, the same type of behaviors that are impaired in subjects with schizophrenia, requires an appropriate level of dopamine input to the DLPFC. 
During visuospatial delayed-response tasks the DLPFC guides decisions about how to sample and process complex visual information and it does this through circuitry involving the frontal eye fields, the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus, and the superior colliculus. The frontal eye fields are located in the frontal cortex, situated between the more anterior prefrontal cortex and the more caudal motor cortex, and control saccadic eye movements which are an integral component of visuospatial delayed- response activity. Interestingly, the mediodorsal nucleus has recently been described as containing both first-order and higher-order relays, both of 

========168========

which appear to be involved in visuospatial delayed-response tasks. First- order brainstem afferents from the superior colliculus send eye movement– related information to the mediodorsal nucleus, which then transmits this information onto the frontal eye fields. In addition to direct corticocortical connections between the DLPFC and the frontal eye fields, information from the frontal eye fields concerning the executed saccadic eye movement is transmitted to prefrontal cortex via higher-order relays in the mediodorsal nucleus. This transthalamic circuitry suggests that the mediodorsal nucleus plays a significant role in contributing to the control of behavior executed by the DLPFC. 
CEREBELLOTHALAMOCORTICAL SYSTEMS. The cerebellum traditionally has been considered to be involved solely with motor control, regulating posture, gait, and voluntary movements. However, more recent studies indicate that the cerebellum may also play an important role in the mediation of certain cognitive abilities through inputs to portions of the thalamus that project to association regions of the cerebral cortex. 
The cerebellum is located in the posterior cranial fossa, inferior to the occipital lobes (Figs. 1.2–5 and 1.2–11). The external surface of the cerebellum, the cerebellar cortex, is composed of small folds, termed folia, separated by sulci. Viewed from the dorsal surface, the cerebellum contains a raised central portion, called the vermis, and lateral portions called the cerebellar hemispheres (Fig. 1.2–11). Located within the cerebellum are the deep cerebellar nuclei, which are arranged as follows: the fastigial nucleus is located next to the midline; the globose and emboliform nuclei are slightly more lateral; and the largest nucleus, the dentate, occupies the most lateral position. Generally, the cerebellar cortex can be considered to process the inputs to the cerebellum, and the deep nuclei to process the outputs. Although many portions of the cerebellum are interconnected with brain regions that regulate motor actions, the circuitry of the cerebellum involved in cognitive functions may be of greatest interest from the standpoint of psychiatric illness. For example, the lateral cerebellar cortex and the dentate nucleus are markedly expanded in the primate brain. It has been suggested that these changes are associated with an increase in the size of cortical areas (especially the prefrontal regions) influenced by cerebellar output and an expanded role of the cerebellum in cognitive functions. More recent studies in NHPs have shown that the DLPFC receives inputs from two ipsilateral thalamic nuclei (medial dorsal and ventral lateral), which receive inputs from the contralateral cerebellar dentate nucleus. The cells of the dentate nucleus involved in these connections are distinct from the cells that influence the motor and premotor regions of the cerebral cortex. Interestingly, functional imaging studies in schizophrenic subjects have revealed abnormal patterns of activation in the cerebellum, thalamus, and prefrontal cortex, suggesting 

========169========

that dysfunction of this circuitry might be associated with the disturbances in cognitive processes exhibited by these patients. 
Basal Ganglia System 
The basal ganglia are a collection of nuclei that have been grouped together on the basis of their interconnections. These nuclei play an important role in regulating movement and in certain disorders of movement (dyskinesias), which include jerky movements (chorea), writhing movements (athetosis), and rhythmic movements (tremors). In addition, more recent studies have shown that certain components of the basal ganglia play an important role in many cognitive functions. 
Major Structures. The basal ganglia are generally considered to include the caudate nucleus, the putamen, the globus pallidus (referred to as the paleostriatum or pallidum), the subthalamic nucleus, and the substantia nigra (Fig. 1.2–28). The term striatum refers to the caudate nucleus and the putamen together; the term corpus striatum refers to the caudate nucleus, the putamen, and the globus pallidus; and the term lentiform nucleus refers to the putamen and the globus pallidus together. 
Although these nuclei are generally agreed to belong to the basal ganglia, some controversy exists concerning whether other nuclei should be included in the definition of the basal ganglia. Some investigators believe that additional regions of the brain have anatomic connections that are similar to other components of the basal ganglia and should, therefore, be included in the term. These additional regions are usually termed the ventral striatum and the ventral pallidum. The ventral striatum includes the nucleus accumbens (Fig. 1.2–29), which is the region where the putamen and the head of the caudate nucleus fuse, and the olfactory tubercle. The ventral pallidum is a region that receives afferents from the ventral striatum and includes, but is not limited to, a group of neurons termed the substantia innominata (Fig. 1.2–8). This section focuses on the structures generally accepted as belonging to the basal ganglia, but also discusses additional structures when relevant to the functional anatomy of the system. 

========170========

FIGURE 1.2–28. Schematic drawing of the isolated basal ganglia as seen from the dorsolateral perspective, so that the caudate nucleus is apparent bilaterally. In the bottom panel, the basal ganglia from the left hemisphere has been removed, exposing the medial surface of the right putamen and globus pallidus, and the subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra. (Adapted from Hendelman WJ. Student’s Atlas of Neuroanatomy. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1994:37.) 
CAUDATE NUCLEUS. 
The caudate nucleus is a C-shaped structure that is 

========171========

divided into three general regions. The anterior portion of the structure is referred to as the head, the posterior region is the tail, and the intervening region is the body (Fig. 1.2–28). The caudate nucleus is associated with the contour of the lateral ventricles: the head lies against the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle, and the tail lies against the temporal horn (Figs. 1.2–8, 1.2–9, and 1.2–10). The head of the caudate nucleus is continuous with the putamen; the tail terminates in the amygdala of the temporal lobe. 
PUTAMEN. The putamen lies in the brain medial to the insula and is bounded laterally by the fibers of the external capsule and medially by the globus pallidus (Figs. 1.2–8 and 1.2–9). As noted earlier, the putamen is continuous with the head of the caudate nucleus (Fig. 1.2–28). Although bridges of neurons between the caudate nucleus and the putamen show the continuity of the nuclei, the two structures are separated by fibers of the anterior limb of the internal capsule (Fig. 1.2–29). 
FIGURE 1.2–29. Photographs of cross-sections of human brain showing basal ganglia nuclei and related structures. (Reprinted from Haines DE. Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone; 2006:416.) 
GLOBUS PALLIDUS. In contrast to the caudate nucleus and the putamen, which are telencephalic in origin, the globus pallidus is derived from the diencephalon. The globus pallidus constitutes the inner component of the lentiform nucleus (Fig. 1.2–28, bottom panel); with the putamen, it forms a cone-like structure, with its tip directed medially (Figs. 1.2–8 and 1.2–9). The posterior limb of the internal capsule bounds the globus pallidus 

========172========

medially and separates it from the thalamus; the putamen borders the globus pallidus laterally. In humans, the medial medullary lamina divides the globus pallidus into external (lateral) and internal (medial) segments (Fig. 1.2–29). 
SUBTHALAMIC NUCLEUS. The subthalamic nucleus (of Luys) is also derived from the diencephalon. The large-celled nucleus lies dorsomedial to the posterior limb of the internal capsule and dorsal to the substantia nigra (Figs. 1.2–9 and 1.2–28). Discrete lesions of the subthalamic nucleus in humans lead to hemiballism, a syndrome characterized by violent, forceful choreiform movements that occur on the side contralateral to the lesion. 
SUBSTANTIA NIGRA. The substantia nigra is present in the midbrain between the tegmentum and the basis pedunculi and is mesencephalic in origin (Fig. 1.2–9). The substantia nigra consists of two components: a dorsal cell–rich portion referred to as the pars compacta and a ventral cell–sparse portion denoted the pars reticulata. Most of the neurons in the pars compacta of the substantia nigra in humans are pigmented because of the presence of neuromelanin; these cells contain the neurotransmitter dopamine (Fig. 1.2–27). The dendrites of the pars compacta neurons frequently extend into the pars reticulata, where they receive synapses from the neurons of the pars reticulata that use the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. 
In rodents, the dopamine-containing neurons of the substantia nigra (A9 region) have been distinguished from the neurons located in the ventral tegmental area VTA (A10 region) (Fig. 1.2–30) and the retrorubral field (A8 region), but more recent studies in monkeys and humans suggest that dopamine neurons can be more meaningfully organized at a functional level into dorsal and ventral tiers (Fig. 1.2–30). The dorsal tier is formed by a medially and laterally oriented band of neurons that includes the dopamine-containing cells that are (1) located in the medial ventral mesencephalon, (2) scattered dorsal to the dense cell clusters in the substantia nigra, and (3) distributed lateral and caudal to the red nucleus. The ventral tier comprises the dopamine neurons that are densely packed in the substantia nigra and the cell columns that penetrate into the substantia nigra pars reticulata. Dorsal tier dopamine neurons express relatively low levels of messenger RNA (mRNA) for the dopamine transporter (DAT) and the dopamine type 2 receptor (D2), contain the calcium-binding protein calbindin, and send axonal projections to the regions of the striatum that are dominated by input from limbic-related structures and association regions of the cerebral cortex. In contrast, ventral-tier neurons contain high levels of mRNA for the DAT and the D2 dopamine receptor, typically lack calbindin, and send axonal projections to the sensorimotor regions of the striatum. Each of these features may 

========173========

contribute to the greater vulnerability of ventral tier neurons to the pathology of Parkinson disease, whereas dorsal tier neurons may be more likely to be involved in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. 
Internal Organization. The caudate nucleus and the putamen are frequently referred to together because of their common characteristics. In rodents, these nuclei are a continuous structure, and, in all mammals, they are composed of histologically identical cells. Most neurons in the striatum are medium-sized cells (10 to 20 μm in diameter) that possess spines on their dendrites; these so-called medium spiny neurons are known to send their axons out of the striatum. In addition to medium spiny neurons, medium-sized cells without spines (medium aspiny neurons) are present, as are large cells with and without spines (large spiny neurons and large aspiny neurons). With the exception of the medium and large spiny cells, most other striatal neurons are local circuit neurons. 

========174========

FIGURE 1.2–30. Diagram of the organization of the striatonigrostriatal and corticostriatal projections in monkeys. DL-PFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; IC, internal capsule; OMPFC, orbital and medial prefrontal cortex; S, shell; SNC, substantia nigra pars compacta; SNr, substantia nigra pars reticulata; VTA, ventral tegmental area. (Modified from Haber SN, Fudge JH, McFarland NR. Striatonigrostriatal pathways in primates form an ascending spiral from the shell to the dorsolateral striatum. J Neurosci. 2000;20:2369.) 
Immunohistochemical and receptor-binding studies have shown a discontinuity in the distribution of certain neurotransmitter-related substances that form the functional circuitry of the basal ganglia. For example, in the striatum, zones that contain a low density of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) enzymatic activity are surrounded by regions rich in AChE activity. The AChE-rich regions are referred to as the matrix, and the AChE-poor zones are termed either striosomes in primates or patches in rodents. The organization of several neuropeptide systems follows this organization. For example, the distributions of enkephalin, 

========175========

substance P, and somatostatin immunoreactivity are organized in a similar manner as the AChE-rich and the AChE-poor areas in the striatum. In addition, in rodents, certain subtypes of dopamine receptors are present predominantly in one compartment compared with the other. In addition, the distribution of some afferent systems terminating in the striatum follows the striosome matrix organization. For example, afferents from the thalamus terminate preferentially in the matrix, rather than in the striosome. 
Functional Circuitry. Projections into, within, and out of the basal ganglia are topographically organized and maintain this topography throughout the processing circuits of the basal ganglia. The existence of such patterns of connectivity has resulted in the hypothesis that parallel independent circuits in the basal ganglia process information from different regions of the brain and subserve separate complex functions. For example and as illustrated in Figure 1.2–30, there is an inverse dorsal– ventral topographic organization to the projection from the dorsal and ventral dopamine neurons to the striatum. Dorsally and medially located dopamine neurons project to the ventral and medial parts of the striatum, whereas ventrally and laterally located dopamine neurons project to dorsal and lateral parts of the striatum. Another prominent input to the striatum comes from the cerebral cortex, and this projection has a topographic organization related to that of the striatonigrostriatal pathway. Orbital and medial prefrontal cortex projects to the ventral striatum, the DLPFC projects to the central striatum, and premotor and motor cortices project to the dorsolateral striatum. These topographies create limbic, associative, and motor pathways within the corticostriatal and striatonigrostriatal projections. 
INPUTS TO THE BASAL GANGLIA. The striatum is the major recipient of the inputs to the basal ganglia. Three major afferent systems are known to terminate in the striatum: the corticostriatal, nigrostriatal, and thalamostriatal afferents (Fig. 1.2–31). The corticostriatal projection originates from all regions of the neocortex, arising primarily from the pyramidal cells of layers V and VI, which use the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate. A topography governing corticostriatal projections has been found in monkeys. Afferents from the sensorimotor cortex terminate predominantly in the putamen; association regions of the cortex terminate preferentially in the caudate nucleus. The prefrontal regions, in particular, provide a heavy input to the head of the caudate nucleus. In addition, afferents from the limbic cortical areas, the hippocampus, and the amygdala terminate in the ventral striatum. The second major class of afferents uses the neurotransmitter dopamine. In Figure 1.2–31, these projections are shown arising from the substantia 

========176========

nigra pars compacta, but, as noted earlier (Fig. 1.2–30), different portions of the striatum receive input from the dorsal-tier or ventral-tier dopamine- containing neurons of the ventral mesencephalon. Electron microscopy studies have shown that many of the synapses formed by dopamine axon terminals on medium spiny neuron dendrites are immediately adjacent to the synapses provided by corticostriatal axons, suggesting that dopamine may play an important role in modulating the excitatory influence of cortical projections on striatal neurons. The third afferent system originates in the thalamus. The thalamic nuclei providing the projections are the intralaminar nuclei, particularly the central median nucleus. 
Disruption of the input pathways of the basal ganglia has been associated with some movement disorders, such as Parkinson disease, which is characterized by muscular rigidity, fine tremor, shuffling gait, and bradykinesia. The most consistent neuropathological feature of Parkinson disease is a degeneration of the dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta, accompanied by a loss of dopamine terminals in the striatum. The compound levodopa (Larodopa, Dopar), a precursor in the biosynthesis of dopamine, is used as a treatment for Parkinson disease because of its ability to augment the release of dopamine from the remaining terminals. Conversely, the administration of typical antipsychotic agents in the treatment of schizophrenia is frequently associated with parkinsonian features and other motor system abnormalities; the fact that these agents are D2 dopamine receptor antagonists is thought to explain their movement-related side effects. 
INTERNAL PROCESSING. The major processing pathways within the basal ganglia are summarized in Figure 1.2–32. As noted earlier, the striatum receives a major projection from the cerebral cortex. Within the striatum, the subclass of medium spiny neurons that contain the neuropeptide substance P sends inhibitory projections to the internal segment of the globus pallidus in what is termed the direct pathway. In contrast, the subpopulation of medium spiny neurons that contain the neuropeptide enkephalin provides inhibitory projections to the external segment of the globus pallidus, which sends inhibitory afferents to the internal segment of the globus pallidus in what is termed the indirect pathway. The globus pallidus external segment also projects to the pars reticulata of the substantia nigra. The topography found in the afferent projections to the striatum appears to be maintained in that processing pathway. For example, the sensorimotor territories of the striatum project most heavily to the ventral portion of the globus pallidus, whereas association territories project to the dorsal regions of the globus pallidus. 

========177========

FIGURE 1.2–31. Diagram of the inputs to the basal ganglia system. Three major afferent systems have been identified: the corticostriatal, thalamostriatal, and nigrostriatal pathways. 
The external segment of the globus pallidus also gives rise to an inhibitory projection that terminates in the subthalamic nucleus. In contrast, neurons in the subthalamic nucleus provide excitatory projections that terminate in both segments of the globus pallidus and in the pars reticulata. Although most connections within the basal ganglia are unidirectional, a reciprocal projection is found between the external segment of the globus pallidus and the subthalamic nucleus. The intrinsic circuitry of the basal ganglia is disrupted by a severe loss of neurons in the striatum in Huntington disease. This autosomal dominant disorder is characterized by progressive chorea and dementia. Although the Huntington disease gene has been identified, how the excessive number of trinucleotide repeats in this gene leads to the selective degeneration of striatal cells is currently a matter of intense investigation. More recent studies indicate that cortical neurons are also subject to degeneration in Huntington disease. 
OUTPUT OF BASAL GANGLIA. The internal segment of the globus pallidus is the source of much of the output of the basal ganglia (Fig. 1.2–33). This 

========178========

segment of the globus pallidus provides a projection to the ventral lateral and ventral anterior nuclei of the thalamus and to the intralaminar thalamic nuclei, particularly the central median nucleus. The pars reticulata of the substantia nigra also provides a projection to the ventral anterior and ventral lateral thalamic nuclei. These portions of the ventral lateral and ventral anterior thalamic nuclei project to the premotor and prefrontal cortices. As a result of the projections of the premotor and prefrontal cortices to the primary motor cortex, the basal ganglia are able to influence indirectly the output of the primary motor cortex. In addition, the cortical output of the basal ganglia exhibits marked convergence; although the striatum receives afferents from all regions of the neocortex, the eventual output of the globus pallidus and pars reticulata is largely conveyed through the thalamus to a much smaller portion of the neocortex —the premotor and prefrontal regions. 
The functional consequences of the neural circuitry of the basal ganglia can also be considered in the context of some of the neurotransmitters used (Figs. 1.2–32 and 1.2–33). Because the afferents from the cortex are thought to use glutamate, which is an excitatory neurotransmitter, cortical afferents presumably excite the structures of the basal ganglia in which they terminate. Many of the processing pathways within the basal ganglia use the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. Finally, the output pathways of the basal ganglia—the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata—use GABA as well. Excitation from cortical afferents eventually disinhibits the target structures of the basal ganglia because of the back-to- back inhibitory pathways of the basal ganglia. 

========179========


========180========

FIGURE 1.2–32.Diagramoftheintrinsiccircuitryofthebasalganglia.SubstanceP(SP)– containing striatal neurons send an inhibitory projection directly to the internal segment of the globus pallidus, whereas neurons containing enkephalin provide an inhibitory projection to GABA neurons in the external segment of the globus pallidus, which project to the internal segment of the globus pallidus. The subthalamic nucleus receives a projection from the external segment of the globus pallidus and projects back to both segments. Finally, the subthalamic nucleus and globus pallidus external project to the substantia nigra pars reticulata. 
Historically, motor systems have been divided into pyramidal (corticospinal) and extrapyramidal (basal ganglia) components; this division is based on clinical findings suggesting that lesions of each system result in distinct motor syndromes. For example, lesions of the extrapyramidal system result in involuntary movements, changes in muscle tone, and slowness of movement; lesions of the pyramidal system lead to spasticity and paralysis. Because of these findings, the pyramidal and extrapyramidal systems were thought to control voluntary and involuntary movement independently. However, this division is no longer accurate for several reasons. First, other structures of the brain outside the traditional pyramidal and extrapyramidal systems, such as the cerebellum, are involved in the control of movement. Second, the pyramidal and extrapyramidal systems are not independent; the neural circuits of these systems are interconnected. For example, the basal ganglia influence motor behavior through certain regions of the cerebral cortex, which then directly (through the corticospinal tract) or indirectly (through specific brainstem nuclei) produce motor activity. 
Finally, although the basal ganglia are important in the control of movement, this neural system also seems to be involved in other functions of the brain. More recent studies of the connections of the basal ganglia in NHPs also support a role for these structures in cognitive functions. The DLPFC has been shown to receive inputs from portions of the thalamus that are the targets of projections from specific locations within the internal segment of the globus pallidus, providing evidence for a distinct pallidothalamocortical pathway. In addition to linking association regions of the cerebral cortex, such as the prefrontal and posterior parietal areas, with the control of motor activity in the primary motor cortex, some of the output of the basal ganglia seems to be directed back to regions of the prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest that “closed” loops are present between the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia, which presumably have a cognitive rather than a motor function. 
Limbic System 
The concept of the limbic system as a neural substrate for emotional experience and expression has a rich but controversial history. More than 100 years ago, Paul Broca applied the term limbic (from the Latin limbus, 

========181========

meaning “border”) to the curved rim of the cortex, including the cingulate and the parahippocampal gyri, located at the junction of the diencephalon and the cerebral hemispheres (Fig. 1.2–34). In 1937, James Papez postulated, primarily on the basis of anatomic data, that these cortical regions were linked to the hippocampus, mammillary body, and anterior thalamus in a circuit that mediated emotional behavior (Fig. 1.2–35). This concept was supported by the work of Heinrich Klüver and Paul Bucy, who showed that temporal lobe lesions, which disrupt components of the circuit, alter affective responses in NHPs. In 1952, Paul MacLean coined the term limbic system to describe Broca limbic lobe and related subcortical nuclei as the neural substrate for emotion. However, over the last 40 years, it has become clear that some limbic structures (e.g., the hippocampus) are also involved in other complex brain processes, such as memory. In addition, expanding knowledge of the connectivity of traditional limbic structures has made it increasingly difficult to define the boundaries of the limbic system. Despite these limitations, the concept of a limbic system may still be a useful way to describe the circuitry that relates certain telencephalic structures and their cognitive processes with the hypothalamus and its output pathways that control autonomic, somatic, and endocrine functions. 
Major Structures. As suggested earlier, no unanimity exists on the brain structures that constitute the limbic system. This section includes the brain regions that are most commonly listed as components of the limbic system: the cingulate and parahippocampal gyri (limbic cortex), the hippocampal formation, the amygdala, the septal area, the hypothalamus, and related thalamic and cortical areas. 
LIMBIC CORTEX. The limbic cortex is composed of two general regions, the cingulate gyrus and the parahippocampal gyrus (Fig. 1.2–34). The cingulate gyrus, a C-shaped stretch of cortex that lies dorsal to and follows the corpus callosum, includes several cortical regions that are defined by their relationship to the corpus callosum (Fig. 1.2–36). For example, the subgenual anterior cingulate lies ventral to the corpus callosum, extending from the anterior boundary of the genu to the rostrum (Fig. 1.2–36). The subgenual anterior cingulate is composed of Brodmann area 25 and subcallosal portions of Brodmann areas of 32 and 24. The subgenual anterior cingulate is connected to other structures of the limbic system, such as the amygdala and hypothalamus, brain regions also often associated with depression. Recent imaging studies reveal that the subgenual anterior cingulate is overactive in people with depression and that a variety of treatments, such as antidepressants, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), result in a decrease of activity in this area. Moreover, in preliminary studies 

========182========

of patients with treatment resistant depression, deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subgenual anterior cingulate and underlying white matter has proven effective in the alleviation of symptoms. It is important to note that the response documented after DBS stimulation likely results from not only direct activation of the subgenual anterior cingulate, but also the activation of brain regions directly connected to it, including the amygdala, hypothalamus, and hippocampus. These areas are connected to the subgenual anterior cingulate via the callosum bundle, the uncinate fasciculus, and the subcortical fascicle and stimulation of these white matter tracts is necessary for the antidepressant response to DBS. Moreover, transsynaptic activation of areas not directly connected to the subgenual anterior cingulated, such as the DLPFC and the insula, might also play a role in the antidepressant effect of DBS. 
FIGURE 1.2–33. Diagram of the output of the basal ganglia system. The internal segment of the globus pallidus projects to the central median (CM), ventral lateral (VL), and ventral anterior (VA) nuclei of the thalamus. Those nuclei then project to sensorimotor, prefrontal, and premotor cortices. The substantia nigra pars reticulata also projects to the VL and VA nuclei. 

========183========

FIGURE 1.2–34. Schematic drawing of the major anatomic structures of the limbic system. The cingulate and parahippocampal gyri form the “limbic lobe,” a rim of tissue located along the junction of the diencephalon and the cerebral hemispheres. (Adapted from Hendelman WJ. Student’s Atlas of Neuroanatomy. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1994:179.) 
FIGURE 1.2–35. Diagram of the neural circuit for emotion as originally proposed by James Papez. 

========184========

FIGURE 1.2–36. Photograph of the medial aspect of the left hemisphere of a human brain indicating the different subdivisons of the cingulate gyrus. sACC, subgenual anterior cingulate cortex; pACC, pregenual anterior cingulate cortex; MCC, midcingulate cortex; PCC, posterior cingulate cortex; RSC, retrosplenial cingulate cortex; ccg, genu of the corpus callosum; ccs, splenium of the corpus callosum. 
The habenula, although technically part of the epithalamus, has significant connections within the limbic system and is divided into medial and lateral subdivisions. The lateral habenula serves as a hub connecting limbic, basal ganglia, and brainstem circuits. These links, specifically those involving projections from the lateral habenula to serotonergic neurons of the raphe nuclei and dopaminergic cells of the VTA, suggest that the lateral habenula may be involved in mood regulation and disorders, such as depression. Preliminary studies targeting the lateral habenula for DBS have been successful and open the door to further study of this brain region in the pathophysiology and treatment of depression. 
As illustrated in Figure 1.2–36, the cingulate gyrus is extensive and as the cingulate gyrus travels posteriorly, it becomes continuous (via the cingulum bundle of fibers in the white matter) with the parahippocampal gyrus, located in the MTL, which contains several distinct cytoarchitectonic regions. One of the most important of these regions is the entorhinal cortex, which not only funnels highly processed cortical information to the hippocampal formation, but also is a major output pathway from the hippocampal formation. 
HIPPOCAMPAL FORMATION. 
The hippocampal formation comprises three 

========185========

distinct zones—the dentate gyrus, the hippocampus, and the subicular complex—and is located in the floor of the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle (Fig. 1.2–10). These zones are composed of adjacent strips of cortical tissue that run in a rostral–caudal direction, but fold over each other mediolaterally in a spiral fashion, resulting in a C-shaped appearance. The dentate gyrus comprises three layers: an outer, acellular molecular layer, which faces the subarachnoid space of the hippocampal fissure; a middle layer composed of granule cells; and an inner polymorphic layer (Fig. 1.2–37). The granule cells extend their dendritic trees into the molecular layer and give rise to axons that form the mossy fiber projection to the hippocampus. 
The hippocampus is also a trilaminate structure composed of molecular and polymorphic layers and a middle layer that contains pyramidal neurons. On the basis of differences in the cytoarchitecture and connectivity, the hippocampus can be divided into three distinct fields, which have been labeled CA3, CA2, and CA1 (Fig. 1.2–37). (CA is derived from the term cornu ammonis after the Egyptian deity Ammon, who was depicted with ram’s horns, which some early investigators thought described the shape of the hippocampus.) Some disagreement exists regarding the so-called CA4 region. This terminology has been applied to the portion of the hippocampus adjacent to CA3 and within the “C” created by the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus. Connectional studies have revealed, however, that this area is more closely related to the dentate gyrus and should be referred to more appropriately as the hilar region or hilus of the dentate gyrus (Fig. 1.2–37). The white matter adjacent to the polymorphic layer of the hippocampus is known as the alveus. The axons in this structure contribute to the fimbria, which, at the caudal end of the hippocampus, becomes the crus of the fornix. These bilateral structures converge to form the body of the fornix, which travels anteriorly and then turns inferiorly to form the columns of the fornix, which pass through the hypothalamus into the mammillary bodies (Fig. 1.2–38). The subicular complex is generally considered to have three components—the presubiculum, the parasubiculum, and the subiculum—that together serve as transition regions between the hippocampus and the parahippocampal gyrus. 

========186========

FIGURE 1.2–37. Photomicrograph of neurons immunoreactive for neuron-specific nuclear protein in the human hippocampal formation. The immunostaining illustrates the major components of the hippocampal formation, such as the dentate gyrus. Scale bar = 1 mm. 

========187========

FIGURE 1.2–38. Schematic drawing of a cross-sectional view of the hippocampal formation and the path of the fornix running between that structure and the mammillary bodies. (Adapted from Hendelman WJ. Student’s Atlas of Neuroanatomy. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1994:189.) 
The components of the hippocampal formation have a distinct pattern of intrinsic connectivity that is largely unidirectional and provides for a specific flow of information. The major input to the hippocampal formation arises from neurons in layers II and III of the entorhinal cortex that project through the perforant path (i.e., through the subiculum and the hippocampus) to the outer two-thirds of the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus, where they synapse on the dendrites of granule cells. The mossy fiber axons of the granule cells provide a projection to the pyramidal neurons of the CA3 field of the hippocampus. Axon collaterals from CA3 pyramidal neurons project within CA3 and, through the so-called Schäffer collaterals, to the CA1 field of the hippocampus. This region projects to the subicular complex, which provides output to the entorhinal cortex, completing the circuit. 

========188========

AMYGDALA. 
Located in the MTL just anterior to the hippocampal formation are a group of nuclei referred to as the amygdala (Fig. 1.2–9). These nuclei form several distinct clusters: the basolateral complex, the centromedial amygdaloid group, and the olfactory group, which includes the cortical amygdaloid nuclei. These nuclei are usually delineated using 
revealed by 
chemoarchitecture of cannabinoid CB1 receptor–containing axons also 
cytoarchitectural 
features 
clearly 
demarcates 
these 
nuclei 
Nissl 
stains. 
However, the 
(Fig. 
1.2–39). 
CB1 
receptor 
immunoreactivity is found within the basolateral nuclei, the largest of the three groups, whereas the central and medial nuclei are devoid of CB1 receptor labeling. The basolateral complex differs from the remaining amygdaloid nuclei in many respects. Although the basolateral complex is not a laminated structure, its connectivity and some other anatomic characteristics are more similar to cortical regions than to the remaining amygdaloid nuclei. For example, the basolateral nuclei are directly and reciprocally connected with the temporal, insular, and prefrontal cortices. In addition, similar to some cortical regions, the basolateral complex shares bidirectional connections with the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus and receives projections from the midline and intralaminar thalamic nuclei. Finally, neurons of the basolateral complex with a pyramidal-like morphology seem to furnish projections to the striatum that use excitatory amino acids as neurotransmitters. On the basis of these anatomic characteristics, one may hypothesize that the basolateral complex actually functions similar to a multimodal cortical region. 
In contrast, the centromedial amygdala appears to be part of a larger 
continuous through the sublenticular substantia innominata with the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST). This larger structure, which has been termed the extended amygdala, consists of two major subdivisions. The central subdivision of the extended amygdala includes the central amygdaloid nucleus and the lateral portion of the 
reciprocally 
structure that is 
BNST. This viscerosensory 
subdivision is and visceromotor 
connected with brainstem regions and with the lateral 
hypothalamus. In addition, it receives afferents from cortical limbic regions and the basolateral amygdaloid complex. In contrast, the medial subdivision of the extended amygdala, composed of the medial amygdaloid nucleus and its extension into the medial part of the BNST, is distinguished by reciprocal connections with the medial or endocrine portions of the 
hypothalamus. 
SEPTAL AREA. 
The septal area is a gray matter structure located immediately above the anterior commissure (Fig. 1.2–40). The septal nuclei are reciprocally connected with the hippocampus, the amygdala, and the hypothalamus, and project to numerous structures in the brainstem. 

========189========

FIGURE 1.2–39. Photomicrograph of a coronal section through macaque monkey brain illustrating the distribution of the cannabinoid CB1-immunoreactive axons in the amygdala. The density of labeled axons is high in the cortical-like basolateral nuclei (ABmc, ABpc, Bi, Bmc, Bpc, Ldi, Lv, Lvi), whereas the striatal-like central (Ce) and medial (Me) nuclei are devoid of CB1-immunoreactive axons. ABmc, accessory basal nucleus, magnocellular division; ABpc, accessory basal nucleus, parvicellular division; Bi, basal nucleus, intermediate division; Bmc, basal nucleus, magnocellular division; Bpc, basal nucleus, parvicellular division; Ce, central amygdaloid nucleus; Cop, posterior cortical nucleus; E, entorhinal cortex; GPe, globus pallidus, external; Ldi, lateral nucleus, dorsal intermediate division; Lv, lateral nucleus, ventral division; Lvi, lateral nucleus, ventral intermediate division; Me, medial amygdaloid nucleus; PN, paralaminar nucleus. Calibration bar = 2 mm. (Adapted from Eggan SM, Lewis DA. Immunocytochemical distribution of the cannabinoid CB1 receptor in the primate neocortex: A regional and laminar analysis. Cereb Cortex. 2007;17:175.) 
HYPOTHALAMUS. The hypothalamus, a small structure within the diencephalon, is a crucial component of the neural circuitry regulating not only emotions, but also autonomic, endocrine, and some somatic functions. In addition to its relationships with other components of the limbic system, 

========190========

it is interconnected with various visceral and somatic nuclei of the brainstem and the spinal cord and provides an output that regulates the function of the pituitary gland. On its inferior surface, the hypothalamus is bounded rostrally by the optic chiasm and caudally by the posterior edge of the mammillary bodies. The area of the hypothalamus between these two structures, called the tuber cinereum, gives rise to the median eminence, which is continuous with the infundibular stalk and then the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland (Fig. 1.2–41). On the basis of these features, the hypothalamus is subdivided from anterior to posterior into three zones: the supraoptic region, the infundibular region, and the mammillary region. (In addition, the preoptic area, a telencephalic structure located immediately anterior to the supraoptic region, is usually considered part of the hypothalamus.) These three zones also are divided on each side into medial and lateral areas by the fornix as it travels through the body of the hypothalamus to the mammillary bodies. As shown in Table 1.2–4, the six parts of the hypothalamus contain different nuclei. 

========191========

FIGURE 1.2–40. Schematic drawing of some components of the limbic system showing the major output pathways of the amygdala, the stria terminalis, and the ventral amygdalofugal pathway. (Adapted from Hendelman WJ. Student’s Atlas of Neuroanatomy. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1994:183.) 
These different nuclei subserve the diverse functions of the hypothalamus. The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) receives direct and indirect projections from the retina and seems to be important in the regulation of diurnal rhythms. The supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei contain large cells (magnocellular neurons) that send oxytocin-containing and vasopressin-containing fibers to the posterior neural lobe of the pituitary. In addition, some neurons of the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) project to the median eminence, where they release neuropeptides, such as corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), into the portal blood system. These neuropeptides control the synthesis and release of anterior pituitary hormones. The PVN also gives rise to descending projections that regulate the sympathetic and parasympathetic autonomic areas of the medulla and the spinal cord. 
Within the medial tuberal region of the hypothalamus, the ventromedial and arcuate nuclei also participate in the regulation of the anterior pituitary function. In addition, the ventromedial nucleus may play an important role in reproductive and ingestive behavior. The medial posterior section of the hypothalamus contains the posterior nucleus and the mammillary bodies. Within the mammillary bodies, the lateral and medial mammillary nuclei receive hippocampal input through the fornix (Fig. 1.2–38) and project to the anterior nuclei of the thalamus. The posterior nucleus shares reciprocal connections with the extended amygdala. This nucleus appears to be relatively more developed in primates than in rodents, suggesting that it plays an important but still-to- be-clarified role in the human brain. 
The lateral portions of the hypothalamus contain a low density of neurons scattered among longitudinally running fibers of the medial forebrain bundle. This region is interconnected with multiple regions of the forebrain, the brainstem, and the spinal cord. The lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) also contains a population of neurons that express the orexin neuropeptides, orexin A and orexin B (also known as hypocretin A and hypocretin B), which seem to be involved in sleep and wakefulness. The approximately 70,000 orexin-producing neurons in the human brain project throughout the brain, with the exception of the cerebellum (Fig. 1.2–42). Orexin neurons project to most of the monoaminergic (i.e., substantia nigra, locus coeruleus, dorsal raphe) and cholinergic (i.e., medial septum, pedunculopontine, laterodorsal tegmental [LDT]) nuclei. Orexin neurons also have widespread projections throughout the cerebral cortex. Areas containing high densities of orexin axons include the 

========192========

paraventricular thalamic nucleus, the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, the locus coeruleus, and the dorsal raphe nucleus. The projections of orexin neurons to neuronal systems involved in sleep and wakefulness (i.e., locus coeruleus, raphe nuclei, and laterodorsal/pedunculopontine tegmental [PPT] nuclei) suggest that orexin neurons participate in these functions. Numerous studies in animals and humans show that an orexin deficiency is the main cause of narcolepsy. For example, mice that lack the orexin gene exhibit physiologic symptoms similar to human narcolepsy, and postmortem examination of the brains of narcolepsy patients have revealed an 85 to 95 percent reduction in the number of orexin-immunoreactive neurons. 
FIGURE 1.2–41. Schematic drawing of the nuclei in the medial hypothalamus. (Modified from Parent A. Carpenter’s Human Neuroanatomy, 9th ed. Media, PA: Williams & Wilkins; 1996:707.) 
Table 1.2–4 
Hypothalamic Nuclei Hypothalamic Regions Periventricular Zone Anterior Preoptic Preoptic nucleus 
Periventricular nuclei 
Supraoptic Suprachiasmatic 
nucleus 
Medial Zone Medial preoptic nucleus 
Lateral Zone Lateral preoptic nucleus 
Anterior hypothalamic 
nucleus 
Lateral hypothalamic 
nucleus 

========193========

Periventricular nuclei 
Middle 
Infundibular Arcuate nucleus 
Paraventricular nucleus Supraoptic nucleus Dorsomedial nucleus Ventromedial nucleus 
Posterior Mammillary 
Mammillary nuclei 
Lateral tuberal nuclei Lateral hypothalamic 
nucleus Lateral hypothalamic 
nucleus 
Posterior hypothalamic 
nuclei 
Modified from Patestas MA, Gartner LP. A Textbook of Neuroanatomy. Malden, MA: Blackwell; 2006:363. 
Functional Circuitry. The major structures of the limbic system are interconnected with each other and with other components of the nervous system in various ways. Several major output pathways of the limbic system are clearly defined. In one pathway (Fig. 1.2–43), highly processed sensory information from the cingulate, the orbital and temporal cortices, and the amygdala is transmitted to the entorhinal cortex of the parahippocampal gyrus and then to the hippocampal formation. After traversing the intrinsic circuitry of the hippocampal formation, information is projected through the fornix either to the anterior thalamus, which projects to the limbic cortex, or to the septal area and the hypothalamus. These latter two regions provide feedback to the hippocampal formation through the fornix. In addition, the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus project to the anterior thalamus. Finally, the hypothalamus and the septal area project to the brainstem and the spinal cord. 

========194========

FIGURE 1.2–42.Schematicdrawingillustratingthecircuitryoforexinneurons. 

========195========

FIGURE 1.2–43.Functionalneuralcircuitryofthelimbicsystem.Thisdiagramillustrates the manner in which the hippocampal formation and the anterior thalamus provide a mechanism for the integration of information between the cerebral cortex and the hypothalamus. F, fornix; MTT, mammillothalamic tract. (Adapted from Nolte J. The Human Brain: An Introduction to Its Functional Anatomy, 3rd ed. Mosby, St. Louis: Mosby; 1993:399.) 
Another major pathway within the limbic system centers on output from the amygdala (Fig. 1.2–44). Highly sensory information, primarily from the association regions of the prefrontal and temporal cortices, projects to the amygdala. Output from the amygdala is conducted through two main pathways (Fig. 1.2–40). A dorsal route, the stria terminalis, accompanies the caudate nucleus in an arch around the temporal lobe and contains axons that project primarily to the septal area and the hypothalamus. The second major output route, the ventral amygdalofugal pathway, passes below the lenticular nucleus and contains fibers that terminate in many regions, including the septal area, the hypothalamus, 

========196========

and the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus. The medial dorsal nucleus projects heavily to prefrontal and some temporal cortical regions. 
Both of these pathways reveal how the limbic system is able to integrate the highly processed sensory and cognitive information content of the cerebral cortical circuitry with the hypothalamic pathways that control autonomic and endocrine systems. In addition, the limbic system interacts with components of the basal ganglia system (Fig. 1.2–45). For example, the ventral amygdalofugal pathway also projects to the nucleus accumbens (ventral striatum), the area where the head of the caudate nucleus fuses with the putamen (Figs. 1.2–28 and 1.2–29). This region sends efferents to the ventral pallidum, an extension of the globus pallidus. This area projects to the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus. The pathway indicates that the functions of the basal ganglia extend beyond the regulation of motor activities and shows the necessity of considering the function or dysfunction of particular brain regions in the context of all aspects of their circuitry. 

========197========

FIGURE 1.2–44.Functionalneuralcircuitryofthelimbicsystem.Thisdiagramillustrates how the amygdala and the medial dorsal thalamus serve to integrate information processing between prefrontal and temporal association cortices and the hypothalamus. V, ventral amygdalofugal pathway; ST, stria terminalis. (Adapted from Nolte J. The Human Brain: An Introduction to Its Functional Anatomy, 3rd ed. Mosby, St. Louis: Mosby; 1993:399.) 
IMPLICATIONS FOR BIOLOGICALLY BASED DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEMS 
The integrity of the neuroanatomic features described in this chapter can be assessed in individuals with psychiatric disorders at different levels of resolution. Disease-associated changes in neuron number, neuron size, or connections among neurons may be reflected in gross structural alterations detected by in vivo imaging techniques. It remains unclear, however, if the resolution afforded by these imaging techniques would be able to discriminate among different disease processes in a manner that could inform clinical diagnosis. For example, a disease-related difference in the volume of a given brain region could be due to fewer neurons, smaller neurons, or fewer neuronal connections; the same abnormality evident by structural imaging could represent very different underlying disease processes. Although postmortem studies provide the level of resolution needed to distinguish among such possibilities, the diagnostic value of findings from these investigations (as is the case for imaging studies) requires the capacity to distinguish among the following four “C’s”: (1) cause, an upstream factor related to the disease pathogenesis; (2) consequence, a deleterious effect of a cause; (3) compensation, the brain’s response to either a cause or a consequence that helps restore homeostasis; or (4) confound, a product of factors frequently associated with, but not a part of, the disease process, or an artifact of the approach used to obtain the measure of interest. The future incorporation of anatomic data into a diagnostic schema for psychiatric disorders will depend on the ability to make measurements at the appropriate level of resolution and to determine which “C” category a given observation represents. 

========198========

FIGURE 1.2–45.Functionalneuralcircuitryofthelimbicsystem.Thisdrawingillustrates the interaction between the limbic system and certain components of the basal ganglia. (Adapted from Nolte J. The Human Brain: An Introduction to Its Functional Anatomy, 3rd ed. Mosby, St. Louis: Mosby; 1993:412.) 
REFERENCES 
Barbas H. General cortical and special prefrontal connections: principles from structure to function. Ann Rev Neurosci. 2015;38:269–289. 
Beneyto M, Sibille E, Lewis DA. Human postmortem brain research in mental illness syndromes. Neurobiology of Mental Illness, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2009. *Bjürklund A, Dunnett SB. Dopamine neuron systems in the brain: an update. Trends Neurosci. 2007;30:194–202. 
Braak H, Del Tredici K. Cortico-basal ganglia-cortical circuitry in Parkinson’s disease reconsidered. Exp Neurol. 2008;212(1):226–229. 
Chen AC, Oathes DS, Chang C, et al. Causal interactions between fronto-parietal central executive and default-mode networks in humans. PNAS. 2013;110:19944–19949. 
Chudasama Y, Robbins TW. Functions of frontostriatal systems in cognition: Comparative neuropsychopharmacological studies in rats, monkeys and humans. Biol Psychol. 2006;73:19– 38. 
Crowell AL, Garlow SJ, Riva-Posse P, Mayberg HS. Characterizing the therapeutic response to deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression: a single center long-term perspective. Front Integrative Neurosci. 2015;9:41. 
DeFelipe J. The evolution of the brain, the human nature of cortical circuits, and intellectual creativity. Front Neuroanat. 2011;5:29. 
DeLong MR, Wichmann T. Circuits and circuit disorders of the basal ganglia. Arch Neurol. 2007;64:20–24. 
Eggan SN, Lewis DA. Immunocytochemical distribution of the cannabinoid CB1 receptor in the primate neocortex: a regional and laminar analysis. Cereb Cortex. 2007;17:175–191. 
Field RD. White matter in learning, cognition and psychiatric disorders. Trends Neurosci. 

========199========

2008;31(7):361–370. 
*Fuster JM.The Prefrontal Cortex, 5th ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2015. 
Glausier JR, Lewis DA. Dendritic spine pathology in schizophrenia. Neurosci. 2013;251:90. Gonzalez-Burgos G, Cho RY, Lewis DA. Alterations in Cortical Network Oscillations and Parvalbumin Neurons in Schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 2015;77:1031–1040. 
Haines DE. Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone; 2006. 
*Lewis DA, Curley AA, Glausier JR, Volk DW. Cortical parvalbumin interneurons and cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia. Trends Neurosci. 2012;35;57–67 
Lewis DA, Melchitzky DS, Gonzalez-Burgos G. Specificity in the functional architecture of primate prefrontal cortex. J Neurocytol. 2002;31:265–276. 
*Nolte J. The Human Brain: an Introduction to Its Functional Anatomy, 6th ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2008. 
*Oberheim NA, Wang X, Goldman S, Nedergaard M. Astrocytic complexity distinguishes the human brain. Trends Neurosci. 2006;29:547–553. 
Patestas MA, Gartner LP. A Textbook of Neuroanatomy. Malden, MA: Blackwell; 2006. Purves D, Augustine GJ, Fitzpatrick D, Hall WC, LaMantia A-S. Neuroscience, 5th ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinaver Associates, Inc.; 2012. 
Ramnani N. The primate cortico-cerebellar system: anatomy and function. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006;7:511–522. 
*Sherman SM. Thalamus plays a central role in ongoing cortical functioning. Nat Neurosci. 2016;19:533–541. 
Sillito AM, Cudeiro J, Jones HE. Always returning: Feedback and sensory processing in visual cortex and thalamus. Trends Neurosci. 2006;29:307–316. 
Squire LR, Bloom FE, McConnell SK, Roberts JL, Spitzer NC. Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2012. 
Steriade M. Grouping of brain rhythms in corticothalamic systems. Neuroscience. 2007;137:1087–1106. 
The Petilla Interneuron Nomenclature Group (PING). New insights into the class and nomenclature of cortical GABAergic interneurons. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013;14:202–216. Tsujino N, Sakuri T. Orexin/Hypocretin: A neuropeptide at the interface of sleep, energy homeostasis, and reward system. Pharmacol. Rev. 2009;61:162–176. 
Wolff M, Alcaraz F, Marchand AR, Coutureau E. Functional heterogeneity of the limbic thalamus: From hippocampal to cortical functions. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2015;54:120–130. 

========200========

▲ 1.3 Neural Development and Neurogenesis 
EMANUEL DICICCO-BLOOM, M.D., AND MARYANN OBIORAH, PH.D. 
NEURAL DEVELOPMENT AND NEUROGENESIS 
The human brain is a structurally and functionally complex system that exhibits ongoing modification in response to both experience and disease. The anatomical and neurochemical systems that underlie the cognitive, social, emotional, and sensorimotor functions of the mature nervous system emerge from neuronal and glial cell populations that arise during the earliest periods of development. Indeed, the nervous system starts forming immediately after the primitive gut (archenteron) invaginates the embryonic ball of cells known as the blastula. This chapter describes the molecular and genetic mechanisms that regulate the generation and movements of cells required to elaborate region-specific populations whose interconnections form functional networks. General developmental principles are highlighted, and the current understanding of the roles of adult neurogenesis, environmental toxicants, and drugs of abuse in brain function and possibly as factors contributing to neuropsychiatric disorders are described. 
An understanding of molecular and cellular mechanisms mediating nervous system development is critical in psychiatry it is now we now known that abnormalities of developmental processes contribute to many brain disorders. While a developmental basis may not be surprising in early childhood disorders, such as autism, fragile X mental retardation, and Rett syndrome, even mature diseases including schizophrenia and depression reflect ontogenetic factors. For example, there are reductions in forebrain region volumes, neuron and glial cell numbers, and some classes of interneurons in schizophrenia that are apparent at the time of diagnosis. Similarly, in autism, early brain growth is abnormally increased and abnormalities of cellular organization are observed that reflect disturbances in developmental cell proliferation and migration. When there is abnormal regulation of early brain development, we lay down a foundation of altered neuron populations that may differ in cell types, numbers, and positions or may elaborate abnormal connections, with consequences for interacting glial populations. With progressive postnatal development, the maturing brain systems call upon component neurons to achieve increasing levels of complex information processing, which may be deficient should initial conditions be disturbed. New neural properties emerge during maturation as neuron populations elaborate additional functional networks based upon and modified by ongoing experience. Given the brain’s dynamic character, it may be expected that 

========201========

developmental abnormalities in neural populations and systems, caused by genetic as well as environmental factors, will manifest at diverse times in a person’s life. 
OVERVIEW OF NERVOUS SYSTEM MORPHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT 
In considering brain development, several overarching principles may serve to guide psychiatrists’ understanding. First, different brain regions and neuron populations are generated at distinct times of development, and exhibit specific temporal schedules. This has implications for the consequences of specific developmental insults, such as the production of autism following fetal exposure to the drug thalidomide only during days 20 to 24 of gestation. Second, the sequence of cellular processes comprising ontogeny predicts that abnormalities in early events necessarily lead to differences in subsequent stages, though not all abnormalities may be accessible to psychiatrists’ clinical tools. For example, a deficit in the number of neurons will likely lead to reductions in axonal processes and ensheathing white matter in the mature brain. However, at the clinical level, since glial cells outnumber neurons eight to one, psychiatrists may only appreciate changes in the majority glial cell population, the oligodendrocytes and their myelin, which will appear as altered white matter on neuroimaging with little evidence of a neuronal disturbance. Third, it is clear that specific molecular signals, such as extracellular growth factors and cognate receptors or transcription factors, play roles at multiple developmental stages of the cell. For example, both insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) regulate multiple cellular processes during the developmental generation and mature function of neurons, including cell proliferation, survival promotion, neuron migration, process outgrowth, and the momentary synaptic modifications (plasticity) underlying learning and memory. Thus changes in expression or regulation of a ligand or its receptor, by experience, environmental insults, or genetic mechanisms, will have effects on multiple developmental and mature processes. Finally, the evolution of the newer mammalian neocortex, where higher mental functioning occurs, highlights the emergence of cortical folding to accommodate larger cortical surface area. As a result, higher functioning mammals possess a higher capacity for neurogenesis by way of an additional proliferative zone. This chapter considers these principles as it examines cellular and molecular systems regulating development, and discusses implications for psychiatric disease. 
The Neural Plate and Neurulation 
The nervous system of the human embryo first appears between 2 and 1/2 and 4 weeks of gestation. During development, emergence of new cell 

========202========

types, including neurons, results from interactions between neighboring layers of cells. On gestational day 13, the embryo consists of a sheet of cells. Following gastrulation (days 14 and 15), which forms a two-cell layered embryo consisting of ectoderm and endoderm, the neural plate region of the ectoderm is delineated by the underlying mesoderm, which appears on day 16. The mesoderm forms by cells entering a midline cleft in the ectoderm called the primitive streak. After migration, the mesodermal layer lies between ectoderm and endoderm and induces overlying ectoderm to become neural plate. Induction usually involves release of soluble growth factors from one group of cells, which in turn bind receptors on neighboring cells, eliciting changes in nuclear transcription factors which control downstream gene expression. In some cases, cell–cell contact mediated mechanisms are involved. In the gene patterning section below, the important roles of soluble growth factors and transcription factor expression will be described. 
The neural plate, whose induction is complete by 18 days, is a sheet of columnar epithelium, and is surrounded by ectodermal epithelium. After formation, the edges of the neural plate elevate, forming the neural ridges. Subsequently, changes in intracellular cytoskeleton and cell–extracellular matrix attachment cause the ridges to merge in the midline and fuse, a process termed neurulation, forming the neural tube, with a central cavity presaging the ventricular system (Fig. 1.3–1). Fusion begins in the cervical region at the hindbrain level (medulla and pons) and continues rostrally and caudally. Neurulation occurs at 3 to 4 weeks of gestation in humans, and its failure results in anencephaly rostrally and spina bifida caudally. Neurulation defects are well known following exposure to retinoic acid in dermatological preparations and anticonvulsants, especially valproic acid (VPA), as well as diets deficient in folic acid. 
FIGURE 1.3–1. Mechanisms of neurulation. Neurulation begins with the formation of a 

========203========

neural plate in response to soluble growth factors released by the underlying notochord. The neural plate originates as a thickening of the ectoderm that results from cuboidal epithelial cells becoming columnar in shape. With further changes in cell shape and adhesion, the edges of the plate fold and rise, meeting in the midline to form a tube. Cells at the tips of the neural folds come to lie between the neural tube and overlying epidermis, forming the neural crest that gives rise to the peripheral nervous system and other structures. 
Another product of neurulation is the neural crest, whose cells derive from the edges of the neural plate and dorsal neural tube. From this position, neural crest cells migrate dorsolaterally, under the skin to form melanocytes, and ventromedially to form dorsal root sensory ganglia and sympathetic chains of the PNS and ganglia of the enteric nervous system. However, neural crest gives rise to diverse tissues including cells of neuroendocrine, cardiac, mesenchymal, and skeletal systems, forming the basis of many congenital syndromes involving brain and other organs. The neural crest origin at the border of neural and epidermal ectoderm and its generation of melanocytes forms the basis of the neurocutaneous disorders, including tuberous sclerosis and neurofibromatosis. Finally, another non- neuronal structure of mesodermal origin formed during neurulation is the notochord found on the ventral side of the neural tube. As shown below, the notochord plays a critical role during neural tube differentiation, since it is a signaling source of soluble growth factors, such as sonic hedgehog (Shh), which impact gene patterning and cell determination. 
Regional Differentiation of the Embryonic Nervous System 
After closure, the neural tube expands differentially to form major morphological subdivisions that precede the major functional divisions of the brain. These subdivisions are important developmentally since different regions are generated according to specific schedules of proliferation and subsequent migration and differentiation. The neural tube can be described in three dimensions, including longitudinal, circumferential, and radial. The longitudinal dimension reflects the rostrocaudal (anterior–posterior) organization, which most simply consists of brain and spinal cord. Organization in the circumferential dimension, tangential to the surface, represents two major axes: in the dorsoventral axis, cell groups are uniquely positioned from top to bottom. On the other hand, in the medial to lateral axis, there is mirror image symmetry, consistent with right–left symmetry of the body. Finally, the radial dimension represents organization from the inner most cell layer adjacent to the ventricles to the outer most surface, and exhibits region-specific cell layering. At 4 weeks, the human brain is divided longitudinally into the prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain). These three subdivisions or “vesicles” divide further into five divisions by 5 weeks, consisting of the 

========204========

prosencephalon which forms the telencephalon (including cortex, hippocampus, and basal ganglia) and diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), the mesencephalon, (midbrain), and the rhombencephalon yielding metencephalon (pons and cerebellum) and myelencephalon (medulla). Morphological transformation into five vesicles depends on region-specific proliferation of precursor cells adjacent to the ventricles, the so-called ventricular zones (VZs). As discussed below, proliferation intimately depends on soluble growth factors made by proliferating cells themselves or released from regional signaling centers. In turn, growth factor production and cognate receptor expression also depend on region- specific patterning genes. It is now known that VZ precursors, which appear morphologically homogeneous, express a checkerboard array of molecular genetic determinants that control the generation of specific types of neurons in each domain (Fig. 1.3–2). 
In the circumferential dimension, organization begins very early and extends over many rostrocaudal subdivisions. In spinal cord, the majority of tissue comprises the lateral plates, which later divide into dorsal or alar plates, composed of sensory interneurons, and motor or basal plates, consisting of ventral motor neurons. Two other diminutive plates, termed the roof plate and floor plate, which are virtually absent in maturity, however, play critical regulatory roles as growth factor signaling centers in the embryo. Indeed, the floor plate, in response to Shh from the ventrally located notochord, produces its own Shh, which in turn induces neighboring cells in ventral spinal cord and brainstem to express region- specific transcription factors that specify cell phenotype and function. For example, in combination with other factors, floor plate Shh induces midbrain precursors to differentiate into dopamine secreting neurons of the substantia nigra. Similarly, the roof plate secretes growth factors, such as BMPs, which induce dorsal sensory neuron cell fate in spinal cord. In the absence of roof plate, dorsal structures fail to form, such as cerebellum, and midline hippocampal structures are missing. Finally, in the radial dimension, the organization of layers is subdivision-specific, produced by differential proliferation of VZ precursors and cell migration, described below. 

========205========

FIGURE 1.3–2.Progressionof brain regional differentiation. Early after neurulation, the neural tube differentiates into four regions (forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord) that gives rise following later divisions and maturation to the different brain structures. 
The Ventricular and Subventricular Proliferative Zones 
The distinct patterns of precursor proliferation and migration in different regions generate the radial organization of the nervous system. In each longitudinal subdivision, the final population size of a brain region depends on the interplay of regulated neurogenesis with programmed cell death (see below). Traditional concepts had suggested that there was excess cell production everywhere, and that final cell number regulation was achieved primarily after neurogenesis through selective cell death mediated by target-derived survival (trophic) factors. It is now known that the patterning genes discussed below play major roles in directing regional precursor proliferation that is coordinated with final structural requirements, and that programmed cell death occurs at multiple stages. Consequently in diseases characterized by brain regions smaller than normal, such as schizophrenia, there may be a failure to generate neurons initially, as opposed to normal generation with subsequent cell loss. 
The generation of specific cell types involves proliferation of undifferentiated precursor cells (or progenitors), followed by cessation of proliferation (exit from the cell cycle) and expression of specific phenotypic 

========206========

characters, such as neurofilaments and neurotransmitter systems. Precursor proliferation occurs primarily in two densely packed regions during development. The primary site is the VZ lining the walls of the entire ventricular system, which contributes to all brain regions in the rostrocaudal dimension. For select regions, however, including the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellar cortex, precursors from the VZ migrate out to secondary zones where they generate a more restricted range of cell types. 
In the early embryo, neural tube VZ progenitors are arranged as a one- cell layer thick, pseudostratified neuroepithelium. The bipolar VZ precursors have cytoplasmic processes that span from the ventricular to the pial surface. During the cell cycle, the VZ appears multi-layered, or stratified, because cell nuclei undergo movements, called interkinetic nuclear migration. New cells are produced through the cell cycle which comprises four stages, including mitosis (M), when nuclei and cells divide, G1 when cells grow in size before dividing again, S-phase, when cells synthesize DNA and replicate chromosomes, and a brief G2 period followed by M phase. Precursor cell division (M phase) occurs at the ventricular margin, producing two new cells (Fig. 1.3–3). The progeny then reenter G1 as they move outward toward the pia. Under the influence of extracellular signals these cells become committed to another round of division, marked by entry into S-phase, which occurs near the upper VZ margin. After replicating DNA, nuclei move back down during G2 to the ventricular surface where they undergo mitosis and divide. The role of nuclear migration is not known, though it may allow nuclei access to environmental cues produced by postmitotic cells that effect subsequent proliferation and gene expression. Several human genetic mutations interfere with interkinetic nuclear movement and cell migration, producing heterotopic neurons and epilepsy syndromes (see below). 
At the earliest stages, VZ cells divide to increase the pool of progenitors before producing postmitotic neurons. Then, during the prolonged period of neurogenesis, with each cell cycle on average, a cell divides giving rise to both a postmitotic neuron and another dividing precursor. At the end of neurogenesis, precursor division gives rise to two postmitotic neurons only, greatly increasing neuron production and depleting the precursor pool. The newly born neurons do not remain in the VZ, but instead migrate out to their final destinations, such as the cerebral cortical plate, traveling along the processes of radial glial cells (RGCs) (Fig. 1.3–4A). These bipolar VZ precursors described above are called radial glia; they have one process associated with the ventricular surface and the other contacts the pial surface (see below). The association between the newborn neurons and the radial glial process allows cells generated within localized VZ domains, known to express distinct patterning genes (see below), to migrate to specific cortical functional areas, such as visual or motor cortex. This 

========207========

suggests that VZ precursors already have their phenotypic fate specified at the genetic level prior to ceasing cell division and beginning migration. However, although there is clearly a role for early expressed VZ genes in maturing neurons, the ingrowing thalamic afferents also impact cortical neuronal fate and function. While in rodents neurons are generated prior to birth and glia are produced after, in the human brain, neuron production generally occurs for the first 4 months of gestation, whereas from then on until birth, neurons undergo migration, whereas glial precursors proliferate, migrate, and produce myelin. 
In addition to this general plan of neurogenesis in the VZ, secondary proliferative zones produce specific neuron populations in particular regions. For example, in cerebral cortex and thalamus, the subventricular zone (SVZ) produces intermediate precursor cells, that can generate oligodendrocytes, diverse astrocytes, and neurons. In hippocampus, the hilus and later the subgranular zone (SGZ) produce dentate gyrus (DG) granule neurons, a lifelong process of adult neurogenesis (see below). Finally, in newborn cerebellum, the overlying external germinal layer (EGL) generates granule neurons for several weeks in rodents and for 7 to 20 months in humans, a population likely affected by medical treatments administered in the neonatal intensive care unit (ICU). In contrast to the VZ, secondary zone cells do not exhibit nuclear movements, suggesting distinct mechanisms of regulation. After neurogenesis is complete, the VZ differentiates into ciliated epithelial cells of the ependymal lining. Underlying the ependyma, undifferentiated cells of the SVZ, referred to as subependyma, have been identified as a neural stem cell (NSC) population, capable of proliferating and generating neurons and glia throughout life. In humans, the final destinations of these newly generated neuroblasts are unknown, but recent evidence suggests that lateral ventricle-derived neuroblasts migrate to the nearby striatum during adulthood to differentiate into interneurons. Furthermore, their depletion is observed during the advanced stages of Huntington disease. 

========208========

FIGURE 1.3–3. Interkinetic nuclear migration in the ventricular zone. During each cell cycle, nuclei move from the ventricular surface at G1 to the border of the ventricular zone where it enters S phase. Nuclei move down during G2, and reach the ventricular surface where they undergo mitosis. Asymmetric division leads to generation of a postmitotic cell that leaves the ventricular zone to produce a neocortical neuron, while the remaining stem cell continues to divide. IZ, intermediate zone; VZ, ventricular zone; V, ventricle. (Modified from Jacobson M. Developmental Neurobiology, 3rd ed. New York: Plenum Press; 1991.) 
FIGURE 1.3–4. Comparison of the developing mouse and human cortex. A: Model of mouse neocortical development. The VZ and SVZ are the primary zones of neurogenesis (dark gray) where RG cells and IP cells reside, respectively. Neurons born in the VZ or SVZ migrate along the RG radial fiber scaffold found in the intermediate zone (IZ), the primary zone of neuronal migration (light gray) in the mouse, to reach the CP. oRG cells are infrequent and not located in a distinct progenitor zone. B: Model of human neocortical development. RG cells, IP cells, and oRG cells are found in neurogenic zones (dark gray), which are the VZ, the inner SVZ (iSVZ), and the outer SVZ (oSVZ). Neurons migrate through the OSVZ and IZ/subplate (zones of neuronal migration, light gray) to populate the CP. Neurons must navigate a larger distance than in the mouse, and a radial fiber scaffold of increased complexity, to reach the CP. (From LaMonica BE, Lui JH, Wang X, Kriegstein AR. OSVZ progenitors in the human cortex: an updated perspective on neurodevelopmental disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2012;5:747.) 
Similar to the SVZ, humans and NHPs have an additional proliferative region in the cortex called the outer subventricular zone (OSVZ), whose extensive proliferation accounts for the massive evolutionary increase in the cerebral cortex. This region first appears during the beginning of the second trimester in humans. By mid-trimester it becomes the main site of neurogenesis, surpassing the neurogenic capacity of the SVZ by almost fourfold. Recent studies have characterized the cell types and neurogenic contributions of this region. The OSVZ contains radial glia-like (oRG) cells that have only one long basal process that contacts the pia, unlike radial 

========209========

glia (RG) of the VZ, which have both apical (touching the ventricle) and basal processes (Fig. 1.3–4B). The origin of these cells is unknown, but one hypothesis is that they originated in the VZ and migrated to the OSVZ via somal translocation. oRG cells have self-renewing capacity and undergo mitosis during somal translocation in the OSVZ, but do not translocate to the ventricle. They give rise to intermediate progenitor daughter cells that also have proliferative capacity and after migrating up the basal process, differentiate into excitatory neurons. The OSVZ might have an evolutionary role in the formation of gyrencephalic (highly folded) brain development, where cortical folding allows the much larger cortical surface area found in higher functioning vertebrates to fit into a limited cranial space. Recent evidence shows that the fan-like orientation of oRG processes favor the formation of gyri, thereby increasing cortical surface area. These areas also tend to have higher rates of intermediate progenitor proliferation. Therefore, the OSVZ appears to have evolved in higher functioning organisms to increase neurogenic capacity in the cortex, allowing for more complex neuronal functioning. 
Radial and Tangential Patterns of Neurogenesis and Migration 
There are three well-recognized spatio-temporal patterns of neurogenesis which underlie regional brain formation. The following examples illustrate common principles concerning relationships of cell cycle exit (cell birthday) to final cell position, the roles of radial glia in migration, and the distinct capacities of secondary proliferative zones. There are two radial patterns of cell migration from the VZ, referred to as inside-to-outside and outside-to- inside. The third involves nonradial or tangential migration of cells, some of which originate in secondary proliferative zones. Experimentally, these patterns are defined in animals by marking mitotic cells using nuclear incorporation of labeled DNA precursors, either tritiated (3H)-t​hymidine or bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), to identify the last day a precursor is in S phase (its birthday), after which it exits the cell cycle, differentiates, and migrates to its final position. 
The two radial patterns of neurogenesis reflect whether a structure is phylogenetically older, such as spinal cord, tectum, and hippocampal dentate gyrus, or more recently evolved, like cerebral cortex. In older structures, early generated cells are positioned on the outside, with later born cells residing inside, closer to the VZ. In the second pattern relevant to cerebral cortex, early born cells are located on the inside, with later born cells migrating past earlier ones to take up position outside. This inside-to- outside gradient requires a more complex mechanism of cell localization. Finally, the specific character of a region may be altered by nonradial inward migration of cells generated in other locations, relevant to GABA interneurons in cortex and hippocampus, or granule neurons in cerebellum, hippocampal dentate gyrus, and olfactory bulb. 

========210========

Of interest to psychiatry, the cerebral cortex is the paradigmatic model of inside-to-outside neurogenesis. Derived from the embryonic forebrain telencephalic vesicles, the characteristic six-cell layers represent a common cytoarchitectural and physiological basis for neocortical function. Within each layer, neurons exhibit related axodendritic morphologies, use common neurotransmitters, and establish similar afferent and efferent connections. In general, pyramidal neurons in layer III establish synapses within and between cortical hemispheres whereas deeper layer V/VI neurons project primarily to subcortical nuclei, including thalamus, brainstem, and spinal cord. The majority of cortical neurons originate from the forebrain VZ. At earliest stages, the first postmitotic cells migrate outward from the VZ to establish a superficial layer termed the preplate. Two important cell types comprise the preplate, Cajal–Retzius cells that form outermost layer I or marginal zone, and subplate neurons, which lay beneath future layer VI. These distinct regions form when later born cortical plate neurons migrate within and divide the preplate in two (Fig. 1.3–5). 
After preplate formation, the cortical VZ generates in inside-to-outside fashion first layer V/VI neurons, and then more superficial layers in temporal sequence. Thus the day on which a precursor exits the cell cycle in the VZ, its birthday, essentially predicts the kind and localization of the neuron generated. Molecular mechanisms mediating this correlation are currently being defined (see below), including specific stimulatory and inhibitory proliferative signals and genetic determinants. Notably, the cortical VZ is the primary source of excitatory pyramidal neurons that secrete glutamate. 
The embryonic preplate harbors Cajal–Retzius cells that produce the extracellular glycoprotein reelin, an important signal for neuronal migration. When reelin gene is genetically deleted in mice, cortical neuron migration is inverted. That is, the usual inside-to-outside gradient of cell generation and laminar position becomes inverted, yielding an outside-to- inside pattern. Thus, early born neurons appear furthermost from the VZ, and latest born cells remain closest to the ventricles. Abnormal levels of reelin protein and mRNA have been observed in several diseases, including major depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, autism, and most recently Alzheimer disease. Human reelin mutation is associated with lissencephaly (smooth brain), a gyral patterning malformation with loss of gyri and sulci, and abnormalities in cerebellum (see below). On the other hand, the subplate neurons, which persist only until early postnatal development in rodents, play a critical role as temporary targets for thalamic axon terminals on their way to cortex. After pyramidal neurons settle into correct layers in cortical plate, thalamic processes migrate further to reach layer IV targets, and subplate neurons undergo programmed cell death. 

========211========

FIGURE 1.3–5. Schematic drawing of radial and tangential migration during cerebral cortex development. A: A coronal section of one-half of the developing rat forebrain. The dorsal forebrain gives rise to the cerebral cortex. Medial ganglionic eminences (MGEs) and lateral ganglionic eminences (LGEs) of the ventral forebrain generate neurons of the basal ganglia and the cortical interneurons. The arrows indicate the tangential migration route for γ-aminobutyric acid interneruons to the cortex. The boxed area (enlarged in B and C) shows the developing cortex at early and late stages. B: In the dorsal forebrain, the first cohort of postmitotic neurons migrate out from the ventricular zone (VZ) and create a preplate (PP) below the pial surface. C: Subsequent postmitotic neurons will migrate along radial glia through the intermediate zone (IZ) and take position in the middle of the preplate, creating a cortical plate (CP) between the outer marginal zone (MZ) and inner subplate (SP). Ultimately, the CP will be composed of six layers that are born sequentially, migrating in an inside-to-outside pattern. Horizontal processes in the IZ represent axon terminals of thalamic afferents. (From Nadarajah B, Parnavelas JG. Modes of neuronal migration in the developing cerebral cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2002;3:423, with permission.) 
The discovery that the neocortex is also populated by neurons generated in the ventral forebrain has changed the view of the origins of cortical neuron populations involved in human brain disease (Fig. 1.3–5). Molecular studies of patterning genes, especially Dlx, strongly support this model (see below). In contrast to excitatory pyramidal neurons, the inhibitory GABA secreting interneurons originate from mitotic precursors of the ganglionic eminences that generate the neurons of the basal ganglia. Subsets of interneurons also secrete neuropeptides, such as NPY and somatostatin, and express NO generating enzyme, NOS. Not associated with cortical VZ radial glia, these GABA interneurons reach the cortical plate by migrating tangentially, in either the superficial marginal zone or in a deep position above the VZ, the subplate region where thalamic afferents are also growing. Significantly, in brains from schizophrenic patients, the prefrontal cortex exhibits a reduced density of interneurons in layer II. In addition, there is upregulation of GABAa receptor binding, a potential functional compensation, as well as a relative deficiency of NOS expressing neurons. These observations have led to the hypothesis that schizophrenia 

========212========

is due to reduced GABAergic activity, though recent models suggest this defect may reflect abnormalities in excitatory glutamate neuron input. The origin of GABA interneurons from the ganglionic eminences, and their association with specific patterning genes (Dlx, see below), raises new genetic models of disease causation, and possible strategies for disease intervention. Thus, more broadly, normal cortical development depends on a balance of two principal patterns of neurogenesis and migration, consisting of radial migration of excitatory neurons from the dorsal forebrain VZ and tangential migration of inhibitory neurons from the ventral forebrain. 
In contrast to inside-to-outside neurogenesis observed in cortex, phylogenetically older hypothalamus, spinal cord, and hippocampal DG exhibit the reverse order of cell generation. First formed postmitotic neurons lie superficially and last generated cells localize toward the center. While this outside-to-inside pattern might reflect passive cell displacement, radial glia and specific migration signaling molecules are clearly involved. Furthermore, cells do not always lie in direct extension from their locus of VZ generation. Rather, some groups of cells migrate to specific locations, as observed for neurons of the inferior olivary nuclei. 
Of prime importance in psychiatry, the hippocampus demonstrates both radial and nonradial patterns of neurogenesis and migration. The pyramidal cell layer, Ammon Horn CA 1 to 3 neurons, is generated in a typical outside-to-inside fashion in the dorsomedial forebrain for a discrete period, from 7 to 15 weeks of gestation, and exhibits complex migration patterns. In contrast, the other major population, DG granule neurons, starts appearing at 18 weeks, and exhibits prolonged postnatal neurogenesis, originating from several migrating secondary proliferative zones. In rat, for instance, granule neurogenesis starts at E16 with proliferation in the forebrain VZ. At E18, an aggregate of precursors migrates along a subpial route into the DG itself where they generate granule neurons in situ. After birth, there is another migration, localizing proliferative precursors to the dentate hilus, which persists until 1 month of life. Thereafter, granule precursors move to a layer just under the dentate gyrus, termed the SGZ, which produces neurons throughout life in adult rats, primates, and humans. In rodents, SGZ precursors proliferate in response to cerebral ischemia, tissue injury and seizures, as well as growth factors (see below). Finally, the diminished hippocampal volumes reported in schizophrenia and depression raise the possibility that disordered neurogenesis plays a role in pathogenesis, either as a basis for dysfunction, or a consequence of brain injuries, consistent with associations of gestational infections with disease manifestation. 
Finally, a different combination of radial and nonradial migration is observed in cerebellum, a region that contributes to both motor and nonmotor circuits, with particular significance for ASDs. Except for granule 

========213========

cells, the other major neurons, including Purkinje and deep nuclei, originate from the primary VZ of the fourth ventricle, coincident with other brainstem neurons. In rat, this occurs at E13–E15 and in humans, 5 to 7 weeks of gestation. The granule neurons, as well as basket and stellate interneurons, originate in the secondary proliferative zone, the EGL, which covers newborn cerebellum at birth. EGL precursors originate in the fourth ventricle VZ, and migrate dorsally through the brainstem to reach this superficial position. The rat EGL proliferates for 3 weeks, generating more neurons than in any other structure, while in humans, EGL precursors exist for at least 7 weeks and up to 2 years. When an EGL precursor stops proliferating, the cell body sinks below the surface, grows bilateral processes that extend transversely in the molecular layer, and then the soma migrates further down into the internal granule layer (IGL). Cells reach the IGL along specialized Bergmann glia, which serve guidance functions similar to the radial glia. However, in this case, cells originate from a secondary proliferative zone that generates neurons exclusively of the granule cell lineage, indicating a restricted neural fate. Clinically, this postnatal population in infants makes cerebellar granule neurogenesis vulnerable to infectious insults of early childhood, and an undesirable target of several therapeutic drugs, such as steroids, well known to inhibit cell proliferation. In addition, proliferative control of this stem cell population is lost in the common childhood brain tumor, medulloblastoma (Fig. 1.3–6). 

========214========

FIGURE 1.3–6. Neurogenesis, migration and differentiation of granule cells during cerebellar development. Granule cell precursors proliferate in the external germinal layer. After exiting the cell cycle, they migrate through the molecular layer and past the Purkinje neurons to reach the internal granule layer where they differentiate and make synapses. Neurons that do not migrate properly or that do not establish proper synaptic connections undergo apoptotis. EGL, external germinal cell layer; Mol, molecular layer; P, Purkinje cell layer; IGL, internal granule cell layer; Wm, white matter. 
Developmental Cell Death 
During nervous system development, cell elimination is required to coordinate the proportions of interacting neural cells. Developmental cell death is a reproducible, spatially and temporally restricted death of cells that occurs during the organism’s development. Three types of developmental cell death have been described: (i) Phylogenetic cell death that removes structures in one species that served evolutionarily earlier ones, such as the tail or the vomeronasal nerves; (ii) Morphogenetic cell death, which sculpts the fingers from the embryonic paddle and is required to form the optic vesicles, as well as the caudal neural tube; and (iii) Histogenetic cell death, a widespread process that allows removal of select cells during development of specific brain regions. Depending on brain region, histogenetic cell death can impact between 20 and 80 percent of 

========215========

neurons. A major role for developmental cell death was proposed in the 1980s based on the paradigm of nerve growth factor (NGF), suggesting that following neurogenesis, neurons enter in competition for trophic factors. In this model, survival of differentiating neurons depended absolutely on establishing axonal connections to the correct targets in order to obtain survival promoting (trophic) growth factors, such as the neurotrophins. Otherwise, they would be eliminated by programmed cell death. This competitive process was thought to ensure proper matching of new neuronal populations with the size of its target field. Although such interactions are involved in controlling cell degeneration, this model is overly simplistic: developmental cell death also occurs in neural precursors and immature neurons, before any synaptic contacts are established. Based on morphological criteria, three types of programmed cell death have been described. The first type, “apoptotic cell death,” is the most common, and is characterized by chromatin condensation and membrane blebbing, followed by nuclear fragmentation and cell shrinkage. “Autophagic degeneration” involves contiguous groups of degenerating cells and features autophagic vacuoles and pyknotic nuclei. Much less common are “nonlysosomal disintegration” and “cytoplasmic-type cell death,” forms that exhibit similarities to necrosis. 
As apoptotic cell death, or apoptosis, is the major type of developmental cell degeneration, underlying molecular mechanisms have been extensively examined. Apoptosis involves molecules that possess enzymatic activities such as cysteine-containing aspartate-​specific proteases, also called caspases, which participate in complex intracellular mechanisms. A large number of signals (both pro- and antiapoptotic) converge to regulate common signaling pathways. Both developmental as well as pathological cell death involve many of the same signaling cascades. A failure to inhibit apoptosis is involved in cancers and autoimmune diseases (multiple sclerosis), while excess stimulation of apoptosis is observed in neurodegenerative diseases during development (Huntington disease, lysosomal diseases, leukodystrophy) and aging (Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s). Massive apoptosis is also observed during developmental brain injuries such as hypoxia-ischemia, fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), or exposure to ionizing radiations and neurotoxicants. Thus dysregulation of apoptotic cell death during development can lead to severe brain abnormalities, which may only become manifest later as mature functional impairments. 
Mechanisms of programmed cell death are divided into three phases: First, a regulatory phase, termed “initiation,” involves numerous extracellular and intracellular factors that promote survival or death. These signals converge on common components, such as initiator caspases, which serve as a switch to initiate (or not) cell degeneration. Then, in the case of cell death ignition, the second phase called “execution” begins. During the execution phase, effector enzymes such as caspases 3 and 7 are activated 

========216========

and cleave specific substrates leading to the last and irreversible step of apoptosis. During this final programmed degeneration, caspase-activated DNAse (CAD) cleaves exposed chromosomal DNA located between the nucleosomes, cytoskeletal components are disassembled, and plasma membranes swell into vesicles termed apoptotic bodies. The cell is then dismantled and phagocytosed without any release of its contents, which would otherwise induce a damaging inflammatory response. 
In mammals, regulation of programmed cell death is highly complex (Fig. 1.3–7). Historically, two main pathways were described: (i) The “extrinsic pathway,” which mediates effects of death factors such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and Fas ligand and involves recruitment of 
pathway” 
mitochondrial factors, such as cytochrome C, and activation of caspase-9. It is now clear that the concept of distinct separation of these two pathways is overly simplistic: in most cases the cell death decision results from the interaction between multiple factors, involving multiple pro- or anti- apoptotic signaling molecules, exerting positive or negative regulation of 
caspase-8; 
(ii) 
The 
“intrinsic 
one another (Fig. 1.3–7). 
Programmed cell 
death 
is 
that 
involves 
release 
of 
a 
necessary 
process 
during 
neurodevelopment, as genetic deletion of caspases in embryonic mice produces enlarged and disorganized brains with marked regional specificity. Programmed cell death occurs at multiple stages of nervous system development, interacting with neurogenesis and differentiation with precise and complex mechanisms. As many neuropathologies also involve dysregulation of apoptosis, future studies hold promise for elucidation and treatment of neurological diseases. 
THE CONCEPT OF NEURAL PATTERNING Principles of Function 
The morphological development of the nervous system is controlled by interactions between extracellular factors and intrinsic genetic programs. In many cases, extracellular signals are soluble growth factors secreted from regional signaling centers (i.e., notochord, floor or roof plates, surrounding mesenchymal tissues). The precursor’s ability to respond 
cognate 
(competence) determined 
depends on by patterning 
genes 
receptor expression, which is whose proteins regulate gene 
transcription. Furthermore, the embryonic telencephalon is subdivided based on differences in morphology, connectivity, and neurochemical profiles, and distinct patterns of gene expression. Classical models had suggested that the cerebral cortex developed initially as a fairly homogeneous structure, with individual functional areas specified only after cortical layer formation, by the ingrowth of afferent axons from the thalamus. In contrast, studies now indicate that proliferative VZ precursors 

========217========

display regional molecular determinants, a “protomap,” which the postmitotic neurons carry with them as they migrate along radial glia to the cortical plate. Consequently, innervating thalamic afferents may only regulate intrinsic molecular determinants of the protomap. In two different genetic mutants, Gbx2 and Mash1, thalamocortical innervation is disrupted, but the expression of cortical patterning genes is not altered. On the other hand, thalamic afferent growth may be directed by patterning genes, and subsequently plays roles in modulating regional expression patterns. Thus, experience-dependent processes may contribute less to cortical specialization than originally postulated. 
Patterning genes express proteins that control transcription of other genes whose products include other transcription factors or proteins involved in cellular processes (i.e., proliferation, migration, differentiation). Transcription factors are proteins that contain two principal domains: a DNA-binding domain that binds promoter or enhancer regions of genes, and a trans-activating domain, which interacts with proteins that can activate or repress gene transcription. Transcription factors can form multimeric protein complexes to control gene activation, which enables a single transcription factor to play diverse roles in multiple cell types and processes. This combinatorial nature of gene promoter regulation leads to a diversity of functional outcomes when a single patterning gene is altered. Furthermore, since protein interactions depend on protein–protein affinities, there may be complex changes when a single factor’s expression level is altered. This may be one important mechanism of human variation and disease susceptibility, since polymorphisms in gene promoters—known to be associated with human disease—can alter levels of gene protein products. A transcription factor may associate primarily with one partner at a low concentration, but with another at a higher titer. The multimeric nature of regulatory complexes allows a single factor to stimulate one process while simultaneously inhibiting another. During development, a patterning gene may thus promote one event by stimulating one gene promoter, while simultaneously sequestering another factor from a different promoter whose activity is required for an alternative phenotype. Finally, the factors frequently exhibit cross-regulatory activity, where one factor negatively regulates expression of another. This activity leads to the establishment of tissue boundaries, allowing the formation of regional subdivisions, such as basal ganglia and cerebral cortex in the forebrain (see below). 

========218========

FIGURE 1.3–7. Regulation of apoptosis. Various positive and negative signals are integrated to trigger caspase activation. Caspases are present in cells as inactive zymogens and are converted into their active form through cleavage of the proenzyme. Each caspase cleaves its substrates at specific aspartate residues, thus initiator caspases cleave effector caspases leading to their activation. AIF, apoptosis inducing factor; Apaf-1, Apoptotic protease activating factor-1; Bax, Bcl-2–associated protein; Bcl-2, B cell lymphoma-2; CAD, caspase-activated DNAse; Cyt-c, cytochrome-c; ERK, extracellular regulated protein kinase; IAP, inhibitor of apoptosis proteins; JNK, c-jun N-terminal kinase; PI3K, phosphatidyl inositol triphosphate kinase; Smac, second mitochondria-derived activator of caspases = DIABLO. 
In addition to combinatorial interactions, patterning genes act in hierarchical fashion by exhibiting distinct temporal sequences of expression and function. To determine functional hierarchies, researchers use genetic approaches (either deleting a gene [loss of function] or over- /ectopically expressing it [gain of function]) and observe the developmental 

========219========

consequences. Generally, genetic analyses indicate that regionally restricted patterning genes participate in specifying the identity, and therefore function, of cells in which they are expressed. Subdivisions of the brain (specifically cerebral cortex) are identified by regionalized gene expression in the proliferative VZ of the neural tube, which leads to subsequent differentiation of distinct types of neurons in each mature (postmitotic) region. Thus the protomap of the embryonic VZ apparently predicts the cortical regions it will generate, and may instruct the hierarchical temporal sequence of patterning gene expression. It appears that the different genes underlie multiple stages of brain development including: (1) determining that ectoderm will give rise to nervous system (as opposed to skin), (2) defining the dimensional character of a region, such as positional identity in dorsoventral or rostrocaudal axes, (3) specifying cell class, such as neuron or glia, (4) defining when proliferation ceases and differentiation begins, (5) determining specific cell subtype, such as GABA interneuron, as well as projection pattern, and (6) defining laminar position in the region, such as cerebral cortex. Even though combinations of genes act in hierarchical fashion to control the temporal sequences of development, any single transcription factor will likely contribute to multiple stages in the developmental life of a cell, yielding complex outcomes in genetic loss/gain of function studies and human disease. 
The transcription factors that pattern the embryonic nervous system belong to protein families that have been highly conserved throughout evolution. Many factors important for brain development were discovered initially in Drosophila, where they mediate body and organ segmentation and morphogenesis, or regulate neural development. In mammals, the Hox family mainly determines positional identity by delineating the anterior– posterior axis from tail to midbrain, playing major roles in defining segments of the hindbrain (rhombomeres) and its cranial nerves. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family, binding DNA and proteins through the basic and helix regions respectively, regulates multiple stages sequentially from neural plate to neurogenesis. Other transcription factor families bear names reflecting protein interaction domains, including LIM homeodomain (Lhx), zinc finger, paired domain (Pax), winged helix (BF1 = Foxg1, Hnf3β), and Pou. It should be noted that restricting the discussion of developmental patterning to transcription factors only is arbitrary for purposes of simplicity, since downstream target genes and proteins, such as cadherins and ephrins that are important in cell migration and axon pathfinding (see below), similarly localize to specific regions. 
Finally, patterning gene expression in nervous system subdivisions can be regulated by environmental signals, such as growth factors released from regional signaling centers. These growth factors establish tissue gradients that provide positional information (dorsal or ventral), impart 

========220========

cell specification, and/or control regional growth. Some examples of signals include the BMPs, the Wingless-int proteins (Wnts), Shh, fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), and epidermal growth factors (EGFs). Cortical development depends on these types of signals that set up developmental domains. These are characterized by the expression of specific transcription factors that in turn, control further regional gene transcription and developmental processes. In light of the temporal and combinatorial principles discussed above, brain development can be viewed as a complex and evolving interaction of extrinsic and intrinsic information. 
Specific Inductive Signals and Patterning Genes in Development 
Induction of the CNS begins at the neural plate stage when the underlying notochord and mesenchyme, and surrounding epidermal ectoderm produce signaling molecules that affect the identity of neighboring cells. Perhaps surprisingly, neural differentiation is the default state of early embryonic tissues unless it is inhibited. To prevent its own neural differentiation, the neighboring ectoderm produces BMPs that instead promote and maintain epidermal differentiation. To elicit neural differentiation, Hensen node, a signaling center at the rostral end of the primitive streak, secretes inhibitory proteins that block the BMP-mediated epidermis-inducing activity. Once the neural tube closes, the roof plate and floor plate become new signaling centers, organizing dorsal and ventral neural tube, respectively. As a principle stated earlier, the same ligand/receptor system is used sequentially for multiple functions during development. BMPs are a case in point, since they prevent neural development at neural plate stage, while after neurulation, the factors are produced by the dorsal neural tube itself to induce sensory neuron fates. 
The Cerebral Cortex 
Forebrain development depends on interactions between inductive signals and patterning genes. The dorsal forebrain structures include the hippocampus medially, the cerebral cortex dorsolaterally, and the entorhinal cortex ventrolaterally, whereas in basal forebrain, the globus pallidus lies medially and the striatum laterally. In the embryo, the forebrain is divided into a checkerboard-like grid-pattern of transcription factors arranged in longitudinal columns and transverse segments that produce unique combinations of factors within each subdivision. Many of the genes, including Hnf3ß, Emx2, Pax6, and Dlx2, are first expressed even before neurulation in the neural plate and are then maintained, providing the “protomap” determinants of the VZ described above. Initial forebrain gene expression is influenced by an array of signaling center soluble factors, including Shh, BMP, and retinoic acid. As the telencephalic vesicles form, signaling centers localize to the edges of the cortex. For example, 

========221========

dorsally, there is the anterior neural ridge, an anterior cranial mesenchyme secreting FGF8, the roof plate, and, at the junction of the roof plate with the telencephalic vesicle, the cortical hem (Fig. 1.3–8). Other factors originate laterally from the junction of the dorsal and ventral forebrain regions. 
FIGURE 1.3–8.Patterninggenesandsignalingcentersinthedevelopingcerebralcortex. This schematic diagram shows a lateral-superior view of the two cerebral hemispheres of the embryonic mouse, sitting above the midbrain and hindbrain (broken lines). Circles indicate the anterior-lateral extent of Pax6 gene expression. The posterior-medial domain of Emx2 expression is indicated by stripes. The genes exhibit continuous gradients of expression that decrease as they extend to opposite poles. The signaling factor fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8) is produced by and released from mesenchymal tissue in the anterior neural ridge, which regulates Pax6 and Emx2 expression. In the midline, bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and Wingless-Int proteins (Wnts) are secreted from other signaling centers, including the roof plate and the cortical hems. (Courtesy of E. DiCicco- Bloom and K. Forgash.) 
Initial forebrain development starts with formation of two telencephalic vesicles from the rostral-most neural tube, the prosencephalon. Secreted signaling molecules, such as FGF8 and Shh, from the anterior neural ridge, the roof plate, the cortical hem, and cells of the meninges and skin, 

========222========

influence this process. Disruption of roof plate signaling causes holoprosencephaly (HPE), characterized by a single forebrain ventricle with a continuous cerebral cortex across the midline. Human HPE is linked to genetic mutations in several components of the inductive cascade, including Shh, its Patched (Ptc) receptor, and several transcription factors, including Six3, Zic2, and TGIF, a component of the TGF-β family. Shh and Six3 are co-expressed in the anterior neural ridge and the ventral midline, whereas Zic2 is expressed in the dorsal roof plate. Furthermore, HPE is seen in some cases of Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome, a defect in biosynthesis of cholesterol, which is necessary for full activity of Shh. Thus, forebrain morphogenesis requires normal signaling center activity. On the other hand, over-expression of dorsal signal BMP elicits cyclopia in the embryo, indicating the balance of inductive signal interactions in forebrain development. Finally, when the anterior neural ridge source of FGF8 is obliterated, there is no induction of BF1 (Foxg1) and an almost complete absence of cerebral cortex results. 
As stated above, regional patterning genes frequently exhibit cross- regulatory activity, where one factor negatively regulates expression of its neighbors. This feature is well exemplified in cerebral cortex development, where loss of one factor leads to changes (usually expansions) in the boundaries of other regulators, with well-known consequences for human brain malformations. After telencephalic vesicles form, opposing gradients of patterning genes are critical in specifying the cortical regions. For example, the rostral/lateral cortex expresses high levels of homeodomain gene Pax6, whereas caudal/medial cortex exhibits Emx2, Lhx2, and Lhx5. A prediction would be that altering gene expression should cause a change in cortical areas, especially the proportions of motor to sensory cortex. Indeed, expression of motor cortex markers is markedly diminished in mice mutant for Pax6, and its downstream bHLH transcription factor, Ngn2, which it regulates. In addition, there is a proportionate increase in caudal sensory cortex. Moreover, there are changes in the dorsoventral dimension: Genes of the ventral striatum and pallidum, Gsh and Dlx, are now expressed ectopically in dorsal territory. A similar dorsal shift occurs with deletion of other dorsal transcription factors, Ngn1/2 and Gli3, yielding loss of the cerebral cortex. These observations indicate that patterning genes exert reciprocal inhibitory functions in several dimensions. Significantly, in human development, PAX6 deletion results in abnormalities of the eyes (cataracts, aniridia, anophthalmia) and the olfactory epithelium and bulbs. Furthermore, the cerebral cortex is hypoplastic, exhibiting nodules of poorly differentiated cells adjacent to proliferative zones, an absence of the marginal zone (layer I) and schizencephaly, a disorder characterized by full thickness clefts through the cerebral hemispheres. 
Conversely, loss of Emx2 in mice results in a small and mispatterned 

========223========

cortex, with caudomedial areas lost and expansion of anterior cortex into the vacated posterior area. Similarly, in human development, homozygous mutations of EMX2 produce schizencephaly, whereas heterozygotes exhibit less severe lesions. The gene dosage effects of human EMX2 mutations suggest that more moderate changes in EMX2 expression during development, say from promoter polymorphisms, could have more subtle yet widespread effects on cortical cell composition and function. 
The impact of soluble signaling molecules on patterning genes that specify cortical areas has been elegantly demonstrated in genetic experiments that alter levels of FGF8. Over-expression of FGF8 in its normal anterior neural ridge location causes a posterior shift of cortical areas, increasing motor and reducing sensory cortices. Conversely, reducing endogenous FGF8 by over-expressing a soluble receptor fragment shifts borders anteriorly. These results indicate that FGF8 signaling alters the ratio of Pax6 to Emx2 in the cortical neuroepithelium, and thereby respecifies the rostrocaudal character that emerges. In addition to FGF8, Wnt and BMP signaling also regulate Emx2 transcription, indicating that combinations of extracellular signals act on patterning gene expression, and consequent cortical development. More generally, gradients of patterning genes and soluble growth factors regulate the nature of cortical areas in all three dimensions. Downstream of these regional patterning genes are molecular targets that mediate cell–cell interactions, such as adhesive cadherins, membrane bound ephrins and their Eph receptors, and members of the immunoglobulin superfamily that play roles in cell differentiation, cell migration, and neuronal process outgrowth and pathfinding. 
Given the substantial roles of early patterning genes and soluble growth factors in specifying cortical regions, do the ingrowing thalamic afferents contribute to cortical development? Do these molecular studies identify how different cortical regions interact with thalamic neurons to establish specific functional modalities, such as vision and sensation? And once regional identity is established, can it be modified by later developmental events? The abundant molecular evidence suggests that intrinsic differences are established early in the neuroepithelium by molecular determinants that regulate areal specification (the “protomap”), including the targeting of thalamic axons. However, despite the evidence of early molecular regionalization, the initial targeting of thalamic axons to the cortex is independent of these molecular differences. However, once they reach the cortex soon after birth, the thalamic axons interact with local regional cues and modify their initial outgrowth to establish proper connections that conform to cortical area molecular identities. Furthermore, the developing cortex exhibits a remarkable level of flexibility in modifying its specific functions: in the ferret, elimination of the lateral geniculate nucleus to which visual retinal ganglion axons project causes 

========224========

them to reroute to the auditory cortex, which then successfully mediates vision! Thus the animal’s visual information is effectively processed by their auditory cortex. 
Layer-Specific Generation of Neurons during Cortical Development. As described earlier, neurons within specific cortical layers establish connections with distinct targets including upper layer neurons projecting within and between cerebral hemispheres, whereas lower layer neurons project to subcortical structures, including thalamus, basal ganglia, hindbrain, and spinal cord. Cortical lamination is an intricate process that is under regulation by both intrinsic genetic mechanisms and extracellular/environmental cues. Abnormalities in these processes can result in malformations of cortical development (MCDs), which are major contributors to mental retardation, seizures, and psychiatric disorders. Examples of MCDs include lissencephaly, focal cortical dysplasias, and polymicrogyria. MCDs can be caused by genetic mutations that effect cell proliferation, apoptosis, neuronal migration, cortical organization, and to a lesser extent, by hypoxia-ischemia and viral infection. Since most MCDs are caused by multiple gene mutations, they are typically classified according to brain morphology and genetic abnormalities. For example, lissencephaly can be caused by single mutations in four different genes (DCX, RELN, LIS1, ARX) and a partial chromosomal deletion (Chr 17p— Miller–Dieker syndrome). Recent studies of the six-layer cortical formation seek to identify layer-specific molecular markers, which can provide clues for diagnosing MCDs as well as elucidate the molecular mechanisms that control normal cortical development. 
There are numerous molecular markers that are expressed during cortical development, and since they appear in a strict temporal pattern, they are convenient tools to distinguish between cortical layers and predict progenitor cell fate. During development these markers are predominantly layer-specific, but they become less so with maturation because the types of neurons found within layers are more diverse. Therefore, the term “layer- specific” marker may only label a subset of projection neurons in one or multiple layers. Through numerous studies, a variety of markers have been identified in mice, consisting of transcription factors (Ctip2, Foxp2, Tbr1— deep layer; Satb2, Brn1, Svet1, Cux1, Cux2—upper layer), hormone receptors (Ror β—deep layer), enzymes (Cyp39a1—upper), and secreted proteins (Reelin—upper layer). Cortical markers found in humans and NHPs include neurofilaments (nonphosphorylated neurofilament heavy chain—deep layer), calcium-binding proteins (calretinin—upper layer), and enhancer proteins (TLE4—deep layer). 
Recent research has shown that proteins that are active during specific stages of neurogenesis can predict the laminar fate of neurons. For example, during the cortical progenitor stage in mice, high levels of the 

========225========

signaling molecule β-catenin are found in precursors that later differentiate into deep-layer neurons, whereas low levels (or inhibition of β-catenin) result in increased upper-layer neuron production. Thus, altering β-catenin expression can alter the proportions of deep-layer neurons. Similarly, during the postmitotic neuron phase, the transcription factor SIP1 has been found to modulate laminar fate. Deletion of SIP1 in mice prematurely increases the production of upper-layer neurons (layers II–VI), leading to a diminished generation of lower-layer neurons. This precocious shift to upper-layer neuron generation was not caused by altered cell cycle rate or premature cell cycle exit. Thus, SIP1 might have a direct role in determining cell fate. 
Do cortical progenitors have a genetic internal clock that determines when a neuron will be born? Evidence supporting an intrinsic program in cell fate determination derives from studies of cortical progenitors grown in vitro where they sequentially generate a variety of cortical neurons. The timing of cell cycle exit, when a postmitotic neuron is born, is thought to be a key determinant of laminar position, thus regulation of the cell cycle has been highly studied. Recent studies implicate proteins that inhibit progress of the cell cycle, specifically the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs). These include p57KIP2, a gene within the Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome gene interval on chromosome 11, whose loss results in organomegaly, and structurally related p27KIP1. p57KIP2 is a strong modulator of the G1/S phase transition in intermediate progenitor cells (IPCs). In mice, deletion of p57KIP2 leads to macroencephaly associated with cortical hyperplasia, which is caused by increased proliferation of both RGCs and IPCs. While the neurogenic phase of cortical development, when cells exit the cycle to become postmitotic neurons, was also delayed, the majority of new neurons produced by excess proliferation were localized to layers—V and VI, expressing lower layer markers Ctip 2 and Tbr1s. Conversely, deletion of the related CKI, p27KIP1, promoted proliferation specifically in IPCs during E16.5, which led to increased neuron production in layers II to V that expressed marker Cux1. 
This genetic internal clock may also be affected by epigenetic regulation, where changes in transcriptional potential can be maintained through multiple generations. Histone modification (acetylation, methylation) and RNA-mediated regulation are some examples of epigenetic mechanisms that modulate activation or repression of gene transcription. Studies have shown that histone methylation plays a role in controlling the proportions of upper and lower layer neurons during cortical development. For example, deletion of the histone methyltransferase gene Ezh2 (in the polycomb repressive complex 2) in mice caused a twofold reduction in the numbers of upper-layer Cux1-expressing neurons, without affecting the deep-layer neuron population. The deletion led to premature differentiation of early cortical progenitors into neurons, thereby reducing 

========226========

the later pool of Pax6-expressing VZ progenitors that produce upper-layer neurons. Studies regarding histone acetylation also implicate a mechanism in modulating upper-layer neuron specification. For example, mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) are commonly used as an in vitro model to recapitulate cortical development. However, the system is not perfect since only early corticogenesis is reproduced, causing a lack of upper-layer neurons. VPA, an anticonvulsant and mood stabilizer, is a known inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACs). VPA treatment of mESC-derived precursors increased the proportion of Cux1-expressing upper-layer neurons and reduced the generation of Ctip2-expressing deep-layer neurons. This suggests that histone acetylation plays an important role in upper-layer neuron specification during late corticogenesis. 
The Hippocampus 
As a region of major importance in schizophrenia, depression, autism, and other disorders, defining mechanisms regulating hippocampal formation may provide clues to their developmental bases. In mouse, the hippocampus is located in the medial wall of the telencephalic vesicle. Where it joins the roof plate, the future roof of the third ventricle, there is a dorsal signaling center, the cortical hem, which secretes BMPs, Wnts, and FGFs. Genetic experiments have defined patterning genes localized to the cortical hem and hippocampal primordia, whose deletions result in a variety of morphogenetic defects. In mice lacking Wnt3a expressed in the cortical hem, the hippocampus is either completely missing or greatly reduced, while neighboring cerebral cortex is preserved. A similar phenotype is produced by deleting an intracellular factor downstream of Wnt receptor activation, the Lef1 gene, suggesting the Wnt3a-Lef1 pathway is required for hippocampal cell specification and/or proliferation. When another cortical hem gene, Lhx5, is deleted, mice lack both the hem and neighboring choroid plexus, both sources of growth factors. However, in this case, cortical hem cells proliferate in excess, and the hippocampal primordia becomes disorganized due to abnormalities in proliferation, migration, and differentiation. A related abnormality is observed with Lhx2 mutation. Finally, a sequence of bHLH transcription factors plays roles in hippocampal neurogenesis: DG differentiation is defective in NeuroD and Mash1 mutants. Significantly, expression of all these hippocampal- patterning genes is regulated by factors secreted by the anterior neural ridge, the roof plate, and the cortical hem, including FGF8, Shh, BMPs, and Wnts. These various signals and genes serve as candidates for disruption in human diseases of the hippocampus. 
The Basal Ganglia 
In addition to motor and cognitive functions, the basal ganglia take on new 

========227========

importance in neocortical function, since they are the embryonic origin of GABA interneurons that reach the neocortex through tangential migration (Fig. 1.3–5). The expression of several transcription factors in precursors of 
the 
ventral 
forebrain 
ganglionic 
eminences 
allowed 
tracking 
of 
interneurons as they migrated dorsally into the cortical layers. Conversely, transcription factor deletion mutants, including Pax6, Gsh2, and Nkx2.1, exhibited diminished or absent interneurons. These transcription factors establish boundaries between different precursor zones in the ventral forebrain VZ, through mechanisms involving mutual repression. As a simplified model, the medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) expresses primarily Nkx2.1 and gives rise to most GABA interneurons of the cortex and hippocampus, whereas the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) expresses Gsh2 and generates GABA interneurons of the SVZ and olfactory bulb. The boundary between ventral and dorsal forebrain then depends on LGE interaction with the dorsal neocortex, which expresses Pax6. When Nkx2.1 is deleted, LGE transcription factor expression spreads ventrally into the MGE territory, and there is a 50 percent reduction in neocortical and striatal GABA interneurons. In contrast, deletion of Gsh2 leads to 
ventral 
expansion 
of 
the dorsal 
cortical molecular 
markers and 
concomitant decreases in olfactory interneurons. Finally, Pax6 mutation causes both MGE and LGE to spread laterally and into dorsal cortical areas, yielding increased interneuron migration. The final phenotypic changes are complex, as these factors exhibit unique and overlapping expression, and 
interact to control cell fate. 
Other transcription factors expressed in the MGE and LGE, including Mash1, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Dlx6, Lhx6, and Lhz7, regulate both the timing of differentiation as well as the type of interneuron generated. Mash1 is expressed in early born cells, whereas Dlx1/Dlx2 appears in later maturing neurons, having as targets other family members, Dlx5/Dlx6. In the Dlx1/Dlx2 double knock out, there is a 75 percent reduction in neocortical interneurons, and complete absence in the hippocampus, while olfactory neurons are preserved. A regulatory cascade has been suggested since Mash1 can regulate Dlx expression, while Dlx2 can induce expression of the GABA synthetic enzyme, glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD). Consistent with this model, the Mash1 deletion mutant exhibits reduced cortical GABA interneurons and striatal cholinergic interneurons. Similarly, Nkx2.1 loss also alters neuron subpopulations, leading to complete absence of all cortical interneurons expressing NPY, somatostatin, and NOS. These studies suggest that transcription factors play roles at multiple stages in neuronal production including generic neuronal fate specification, as well 
as neuron subtype determination. 
Neuronal Specification As described for 
basal 
ganglia, 
throughout 
the 
nervous 
system 

========228========

transcription factors regulate decisions at multiple levels, including determining the generic neural cell, neuron or glial cell, as well as neuron subtypes. Mash1 can promote a neuronal fate over a glial fate, as well as induce the GABA interneuron phenotype. However, another bHLH factor, Olig1/2, can promote oligodendrocyte development, whereas it promotes motor neuron differentiation elsewhere, indicating that the variety of factors expressed in a specific cell leads to combinatorial effects and thus diverse outcomes for cell differentiation. The bHLH inhibitory factor, Id, is expressed at the transition from somatosensory to motor cortex, implying roles of family members in areal characteristics. In the hippocampus, granule neuron fate is dependent on NeuroD and Math1, with deficient cell numbers when either one is deleted. The role of specific factors in cortical cell layer determination remains an area of active investigation, but likely includes Tbr1, Otx1, and Pax6. 
REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION BY MICRO RNAS 
Over the last decade a new mechanism for regulating messenger RNA (mRNA) has been explored in simple to complex organisms that involves microRNAs (miRNAs). It is now known that miRNAs contribute not only to normal development and brain function but also to brain disorders, such as Parkinson and Alzheimer disease, tauopathies, and brain cancer. miRNAs can affect the regulation of RNA transcription, alternative splicing, molecular modifications, or RNA translation. miRNAs are 21- to 23- nucleotide long single strand RNA molecules. Unlike mRNAs that encode the instructions for ribosome complex translation into proteins, miRNAs are noncoding RNAs that are not translated, but are instead processed to form loop structures. miRNAs exhibit a sequence that is partially complementary to one but usually several cellular mRNAs. By binding to target mRNA transcripts, the miRNAs serve to interfere with their function, thereby downregulating expression of these gene products. This gene silencing involves a complex mechanism: the larger miRNA primary transcript is first processed by the Microprocessor, an enzymatic complex consisting of the nuclease Drosha and the double-stranded RNA binding protein Pasha. The mature miRNA binds to its complementary RNA and then interacts with the endonuclease Dicer, that is part of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), resulting in the cleavage of the target mRNA and gene silencing. 
Currently, 475 miRNAs have been identified in humans, and their total number is estimated between 600 and 3,441. Potentially, up to 30 percent of all genes might be regulated by miRNAs, a whole new layer of molecular complexity. Importantly, many miRNAs are encoded by genomic sequences outside the ~20,000 structural genes, emphasizing the importance of studying the whole genome, as opposed to only exomes, which account for only ~2 percent of the chromosome. A connection between miRNAs and 

========229========

several brain diseases has already been made. For example, miR-133b, which is specifically expressed in midbrain dopaminergic neurons, is deficient in midbrain tissue from patients with Parkinson disease. Further, the miRNAs encoding miR-9, miR-124a, miR-125b, miR-128, miR-132, and miR-219 are abundantly represented in fetal hippocampus, are differentially regulated in the aged brain, and are altered in Alzheimer disease hippocampus. Similar RNA species termed small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) have been discovered in plants where they prevent the transcription of viral RNA. The mechanisms involved in these effects are closely related to that of miRNA. Thus siRNAs are now being used in both basic and clinical research to downregulate specific cellular gene products, advancing the study of pathways involved in neurodevelopment and providing new selective tools to regulate disease causing genes or therapeutic molecular targets. 
REGULATION OF NEURODEVELOPMENT BY EXTRACELLULAR FACTORS Extracellular factors that regulate cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, and survival interact with intrinsic genetic determinants to control region-specific neurogenesis. This section focuses on precursor proliferation as one model process. Patterning genes control the expression of growth factor receptors and the molecular machinery of the cell division cycle. These factors are known to stimulate or inhibit proliferation of VZ precursors and are termed autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine, meaning that the signals originate from the cells themselves, neighboring cells/tissues, and from the general circulation, respectively. Although defined initially in cell culture, a number of mitogenic growth factors are now well characterized in vivo. There are those that stimulate proliferation, such as basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), EGF, IGF-I, Shh, and signals that inhibit cell division, such as pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP), GABA, glutamate, and members of the TGF-β superfamily. In addition to acting as mitogens, which stimulate reentry of cells into the cell cycle, extracellular signals also act as trophic factors, which enhance proliferation by promoting survival of the mitotic population. Stimulation of both pathways is necessary to produce maximal cell numbers. Several of the neurotrophins, especially BDNF and neurotrophin-3 (NT3), promote survival of mitotic precursors as well as the newly generated progeny. 
The expression of extracellular mitogens and their receptors during development is essential for proper neurogenesis to occur. Therefore, altering their expression and activity has profound and permanent consequences. For example, administering growth factors to developing embryos or pups induces changes in proliferation in the prenatal cortical VZ, postnatal cerebellar EGL, and hippocampal DG that produce lifelong modifications in brain region population size and cell composition. In 

========230========

addition, environmental factors (hypoxia, maternal/fetal infection, drug or toxicant exposure) can also dysregulate mitogenic pathways during development, which will likely produce subtle changes in the size and composition of the developing cortex. Such changes may be relevant to structural differences observed in neuropsychiatric disorders, such as depression, schizophrenia, and autism. Indeed, abnormalities in the expression of the FGF ligand and receptor systems have been found consistently in human brain samples from those with major depressive disorders (MDDs), as well as numerous animal models of stress and depressive behaviors. 
Similar to cerebral cortex, later generated populations of granule neurons, such as those in cerebellum and hippocampal dentate gyrus, are also sensitive to growth factor manipulation, especially relevant to therapies administered intravenously to premature and newborn infants in the neonatal nursery. Like the human, cerebellar granule neurons are produced postnatally in rat, but for only three weeks, whereas in both species, hippocampal DG neurons are produced throughout life. Proliferative signals regulating cerebellar granule neurogenesis include bFGF, Shh and PACAP, whose disruption contributes to human medulloblastoma, whereas in hippocampus, the Wnt family may be involved. 
Therapies that cause alterations in the effects of growth factors in newborns have several clinical implications. First, the long-term consequences of administering therapeutic agents, which might have neurogenetic effects on the brain, may need to be investigated. Second, since bFGF is as effective in stimulating adult neurogenesis (see below) as in newborns because of specific transport across the mature BBB, it is possible that other protein growth factors preferentially enter the brain and alter ongoing neurogenesis. Indeed, in rats, IGF-I also stimulates mature hippocampal DG neurogenesis. Third, other therapeutics cross the BBB efficiently due to their lipid solubility, such as steroids, which inhibit neurogenesis across the age spectrum. Steroids are frequently used perinatally to promote lung maturation and treat infections and trauma, but effects on human brain formation have not been examined. Fourth, it is well known that neurological development may be delayed in children experiencing serious systemic illness that is associated with numerous inflammatory cytokines, and one may wonder to what degree this reflects interference with neurogenesis and concomitant processes, potentially producing long-term differences in cognitive and motor functional development. Finally, maternal infection during pregnancy is a known risk factor for schizophrenia, and cytokines that cross the placental barrier may directly affect fetal brain cell proliferation and differentiation as well as cell migration, axon target selection, and synapse maturation as shown in animal models, eventually leading to multiple brain and behavioral 

========231========

abnormalities in the adult offspring. 
Cell Migration 
During development, new neurons migrate radially (cortex), tangentially (inhibitory GABA interneurons from MGEs), or through a migratory stream (granule interneurons of the olfactory bulb), to their final destinations. Disrupting neuronal migration can result in abnormal cell localization and function. Animal models have defined molecular pathways involved in neuronal migration. Cell movement requires signals to start and stop migration, adhesion molecules to guide migration, and functional cytoskeleton to mediate cell translocation. The best-characterized mouse model of aberrant neuronal migration is reeler, a spontaneous mutant in which cortical neuron laminar position is inverted, being generated in outside-to-inside fashion. Reelin is a large, secreted extracellular glycoprotein produced embryonically by the earliest neurons in the cortical preplate, Cajal–Retzius cells, and in hippocampus and cerebellum. Molecular and genetic analysis has established a signaling sequence in reelin activity which includes at least two receptors, the very-low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) and the apoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2), and the intracellular adapter protein, disabled 1 (Dab1), initially identified in the scrambler mutant mouse, a reelin phenocopy. Current thoughts consider the reelin system as one mediator of radial glial-guided neuron migration, though specific functions in starting or stopping migration remain controversial. The roles of the VLDL and ApoE2 receptors are intriguing for their possible contributions to Alzheimer disease risk, based on many genetic studies. Other studies have found human reelin gene (RELN) mutations associated with autosomal recessive lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia, exhibiting a markedly thickened cortex with pachygyria, abnormal hippocampal formations, and severe cerebellar hypoplasia with absent folia. Additional studies suggest that reelin polymorphisms may contribute to ASD risk as well. 
With regard to cytoskeletal proteins, studies of the filamentous fungus, Aspergillus nidulans, surprisingly provided insights into molecular machinery underlying the human migration disorder, Miller–Dieker syndrome, a lissencephaly associated with abnormal chromosome 17q13.3. Lissencephaly is a diverse disorder characterized by a smooth cortical surface lacking in gyri and sulci, with markedly reduced brain surface area. The absence of convolutions results from a migration defect, the majority of neurons failing to reach final destinations. In classical lissencephaly (Type I), cerebral cortex is thick and usually four-layered, while in cobblestone lissencephaly (Type II) the cortex is chaotically organized with a partly smooth and partly pebbled surface and deficient lamination. The most severely affected parts of the brain are the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, with cerebellum less affected. In fungus, the gene NudF was 

========232========

found essential for intracellular nuclear distribution, a translocation process also involved in mammalian cell migration. The human homologue of NudF is LIS-1 or PAFAH1B1, the mutation of which accounts for up to 60 percent of lissencephaly cases, of type I pathology. The LIS-1 gene product interacts with microtubules, and related motor components, dynein and dynactin, as well as doublecortin (DCX), which regulate microtubule stability. Mutations in DCX gene result in X-linked lissencephaly in males and bands of heterotopic neurons in white matter in females, appearing as a “double cortex” on imaging studies, producing severe mental retardation and epilepsy. Other migratory defects occur when proteins associated with the actin cytoskeleton are affected, such as mutation in filamin 1 gene responsible for periventricular nodular heterotopias in humans, and mutations of a regulatory phosphokinase enzyme, the CDK5/p35 complex. 
Cell migration also depends on molecules mediating cellular interactions, which provide cell adhesion to establish neuron–neuron and neuron–glial relationships, or induce attraction or repulsion. Astrotactin is a major glial protein involved in neuronal migration on radial glial processes, whereas neuregulins and their receptors, ErbB2–4, play roles in neuronal–glial migratory interactions. Studies associate neuregulin polymorphisms with schizophrenia, suggesting that this developmental disease may depend on altered oligodendrocyte numbers and activities and synaptic functions. Furthermore, some work suggests that early appearing neurotransmitters themselves, GABA and glutamate, and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), regulate migration speed. In contrast to radial migration from cortical VZ, GABA interneurons generated in ganglionic eminences employ different mechanisms to leave the ventral forebrain and migrate dorsally into the cerebral cortex. Several signaling systems have been identified, including the Slit protein and Robo receptor, the semaphorins and their neuropilin receptors, and hepatocyte growth factor and its c-Met receptor, all of which appear to repel GABA interneurons from basal forebrain, promoting tangential migration into cortex (Fig. 1.3– 5). Significantly, the c-Met receptor is associated with ASDs, suggesting that altered GABA interneuron migration into cortex and deficits in inhibitory signaling may contribute to the phenotype including seizures and abnormal cognitive processing. Finally, several human forms of congenital muscular dystrophy with severe brain and eye migration defects result from gene mutations in enzymes that transfer mannose sugars to serine/threonine -OH groups in glycoproteins, interrupting interactions with several extracellular matrix molecules, producing type II cobblestone lissencephalies. 
Differentiation and Neuronal Process Outgrowth 
After newly produced neurons and glial cells reach their final destinations, they differentiate into mature cells. For neurons, this involves outgrowth of 

========233========

dendrites and extension of axonal processes, formation of synapses, and production of neurotransmitter systems, including receptors and selective reuptake sites. Most axons will become insulated by myelin sheaths produced by oligodendroglial cells. Many of these events occur with a peak period from 5 months of gestation onward. During the first several years of life, many neuronal systems exhibit exuberant process growth and branching, which is later decreased by selective “pruning” of axons and synapses dependent on experience, while myelination continues for several years after birth and into adulthood. 
While there is tremendous synapse plasticity in adult brain, a fundamental feature of the nervous system is the point-to-point or topographic mapping of one neuron population to another. During development, neurons extend axons to innervate diverse distant targets, such as cortex and spinal cord. The structure that recognizes and responds to cues in the environment is the growth cone, located at the axon tip. The axonal process is structurally supported by microtubules that are regulated by numerous microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), whereas the terminal growth cone exhibits a transition to actin-containing microfilaments (Fig. 1.3–9). The growth cone has rod-like extensions called filopodia that bear receptors for specific guidance cues present on cell surfaces and in extracellular matrix. Interactions between filopodial receptors and environmental cues cause growth cones to move forward, turn, or retract. Abnormalities in actin modulating proteins and kinases involved in rapid growth cone movements may contribute to language and cognitive disorders, such as LIMK kinase whose mutation causes Williams syndrome. The region-specific expression of extracellular guidance molecules, such as cadherins, regulated by patterning genes Pax6 and Emx2, results in highly directed outgrowth of axons, termed axonal pathfinding. These molecules affect the direction, speed, and fasciculation of axons, acting through either positive or negative regulation. Guidance molecules may be soluble extracellular factors, or alternatively, may be bound to extracellular matrix or cell membranes, such as the transmembrane ephrin proteins. Playing major roles in topographic mapping between neuron populations and their targets, ephrins act via the largest known family of tyrosine kinase receptors in brain, Eph receptors. Ephrins frequently serve as chemorepellent cues, negatively regulating growth by preventing developing axons from entering incorrect target fields. For example, the optic tectum (superior colliculus) expresses ephrins A2 and A5 in decreasing gradients from posterior to anterior, whereas innervating retinal ganglion cells express a gradient of Eph receptors. Ganglion cell axons from posterior retina, which possess high Eph A3 receptor levels, preferentially innervate the anterior tectum because the low-level ephrin expression does not activate the Eph kinase that causes retraction. In the category of soluble molecules, netrins serve primarily as 

========234========

chemoattractant proteins secreted, for instance, by the spinal cord floor plate to stimulate spinothalamic sensory interneurons to grow into the anterior commissure, whereas Slit is a secreted chemorepulsive factor which through its roundabout (Robo) receptor regulates midline crossing, and axonal fasciculation and pathfinding. 
In neocortex, layers V and VI axons exit the hemisphere laterally via the internal capsule to reach subcortical destinations, whereas layer III axons extend medially through corpus callosum to innervate the opposite hemisphere. The internal capsule carries bidirectional axons, from cortex to thalamus and beyond, as well as thalamocortical processes, exhibiting precise connections between individual thalamic nuclei and distinct cortical domains. During development, thalamic axons must travel a complex route, passing through lateral ventral thalamus, turning to enter the internal capsule and turning dorsally to reach cortical targets. However, thalamic axons reach the developing neocortex before their target neurons have reached the appropriate layers. Instead, the early-generated subplate neurons lying below layer VI serve as temporary targets for thalamic axons. The subplate neurons express the chemoattractant netrin 1 and chemorepellent ephrin-A5, which is complemented by Eph receptor expression on thalamic axon growth cones. After cortical neurons complete laminar migration, thalamic axons leave subplate neurons, which apparently undergo apoptosis, and extend into proper cortical layers guided by a number of cues, including chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans, ephrins, and cadherins under patterning gene regulation. Similar principles regulate axonal targeting throughout the brain and misrouted axon terminals have been shown in animal models when ephrin/Eph expression is altered. 
FIGURE 1.3–9. Structure of the growth cone. The cone is subdivided into two domains: the central domain, which contains mitochondria and microtubules, and the peripheral domain, containing veil-like lamellipodia and spike-like filopodia. In the lamellipodia, microfilaments consisting of actin form a meshwork, while in filopodia, they have the same 

========235========

orientation. Cell surface receptors on growth cone processes sense extracellular guidance cues to control navigation. 
GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN NEUROPSYCHIATRIC DISEASE An increasing number of neuropsychiatric conditions such as schizophrenia, depression, autism, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are considered to originate during brain development. In addition, ongoing research suggests that environmental factors such as neurotoxicants and drugs of abuse contribute to the development of neuropsychiatric disease. Defining when a condition begins helps direct attention to underlying pathogenetic mechanisms. The term neurodevelopmental suggests that the brain is abnormally formed from the very beginning due to disruption of fundamental processes, in contrast to a normally formed brain that is injured secondarily or that undergoes degenerative changes. However, the value of the term neurodevelopmental needs to be reconsidered, because of different usage by clinicians and pathologists. In addition, given that the same molecular signals function during development and maturation, altering an early ontogenetic process (i.e., by changes in growth factor signaling) probably means that other adult functions will also exhibit ongoing dysregulation. For example, clinical researchers of schizophrenia consider the disorder neurodevelopmental because at the time of onset and diagnosis, the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus are smaller and ventricles enlarged already at adolescent presentation. In contrast, the neuropathologist uses the term neurodevelopmental for certain morphological changes in neurons. If a brain region exhibits a normal cytoarchitecture but with neurons of smaller than normal diameter, reminiscent of “immature” stages, then this may be considered an arrest of development. However, if inflammatory signs, such as gliosis and white blood cell infiltrate, accompany the same cellular changes this is termed neurodegeneration. These morphological and cellular changes may no longer be adequate to distinguish disorders that originate from development versus adulthood, especially given the roles of glial cells, including astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia, as sources of neurotrophic support during both periods of life. Thus, abnormalities in glial cells may occur in both epochs to promote disease, or act as mechanisms of repair. Many neurodegenerations are associated with microglial cells such as Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases. On the other hand neuronal dysfunction in adulthood associated with cell shrinkage may occur without inflammatory changes. In animal models, interrupting BDNF neurotrophic signaling in adult brain results in neuronal and dendrite atrophy in cerebral cortex without eliciting glial cell proliferation. Thus finding small neurons without gliosis in the brains of schizophrenic and autistic patients does not necessarily mean the condition is only or primarily developmental in 

========236========

origin. In turn, several etiological assumptions about clinical brain conditions may require reexamination. 
Because the same processes that mediate development, including neurogenesis, gliogenesis, axonal growth and retraction, synaptogenesis, and cell death, also function during adulthood, a new synthesis has been proposed by Mattson. All of these processes, though perhaps in more subtle form, contribute to adaptive and pathological processes (Fig. 1.3–10). Successful aging of the nervous system may require precise regulation of these processes, allowing the brain to adapt properly and counteract the numerous intrinsic and extrinsic events that could potentially lead to neuropathology. For example, adult neurogenesis (see below) and synaptic plasticity are necessary to maintain neuronal circuitry and ensure proper cognitive functions. Programmed cell death is crucial to prevent tumorigenesis that can occur as cells accumulate mutations throughout life. Thus, dysregulation of these ontogenetic processes in adulthood will lead to disruption of brain homeostasis, expressing itself as various neuropsychiatric diseases (Fig. 1.3–10). 
Schizophrenia 
As schizophrenia and its causes is the subject of many chapters in this textbook, this chapter’s discussion is restricted to several disease manifestations that may involve neurodevelopmental mechanisms. The neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia postulates that etiologic and pathogenetic factors occurring before the formal onset of the illness (during gestation) disrupt the course of normal development. These subtle early alterations in specific neurons, glia, and circuits confer vulnerability to other later developmental factors, ultimately leading to malfunctions. Schizophrenia is clearly a multifactorial disorder, which is caused by both genetic and environmental factors. Clinical studies using risk assessment have identified some relevant factors, including prenatal and birth complications (hypoxia, infection, substance, and toxicant exposure), family history, body dysmorphia, especially structures of neural crest origin, and presence of mild premorbid deficits in social, motor, and cognitive functions. These risk factors may impact ongoing developmental processes such as experience-dependent axonal and dendritic production, programmed cell death, myelination, and synaptic pruning. An intriguing animal model using human influenza-induced pneumonia of pregnant mice shows that the inflammatory cytokine response produced by the mother may directly affect the offspring’s brain development, with no evidence of the virus in the fetus or placenta. 

========237========

FIGURE 1.3–10. Dysregulation of neurodevelopmental processes during aging. Successful aging requires a balance between adult neurogenesis, death of unwanted cells (tumoral cells), and adaptive synaptogenesis. These processes involve mechanisms similar (but not identical) to those observed during neurodevelopment: cell proliferation, synaptogenesis, cell death. Dysregulation of these mechanisms can lead to neurodegeneration, brain tumors, or various brain dysfunctions. 
Neuroimaging and pathology studies suggest abnormal development because there are structural abnormalities at disease presentation, including smaller prefrontal cortex and hippocampus and enlarged ventricles. More severely affected patients exhibit a greater number of affected regions with larger changes. In some cases, ventricular enlargement and cortical grey matter atrophy increase with time. These ongoing progressive changes should lead one to reconsider the potential role of active degeneration in schizophrenia, whether due to the disease, or its consequences, such as stress or drug treatment. However, classic signs of neurodegeneration with inflammatory cells are not present. 
Structural neuroimaging strongly supports the conclusion that the hippocampus in schizophrenia is about 5 percent smaller. In turn, brain morphology has been used to assess etiological contributions of genetic and environmental factors. Comparisons of concordance for schizophrenia in monozygotic and dizygotic twins support roles for both factors. Among monozygotic twins, only 40 to 50 percent of both twins have the illness, indicating genetic constitution alone does not assure disease, and suggesting the embryonic environment also contributes. Neuroimaging, pharmacological, and pathological studies suggest that some genetic factors confer susceptibility, and that secondary insults, such as birth trauma or perinatal viral infection, also contribute. This model is consistent with 

========238========

imaging studies showing small hippocampus in both affected and unaffected monozygotic twins. Moreover, healthy individuals with genetic susceptibility show hippocampal volumes (smaller) more similar to affected probands than normal controls. Thus hippocampal volume reduction is not pathognomonic of schizophrenia, but rather may represent a biological marker of genetic susceptibility. It is not difficult to envision roles for altered developmental regulators in producing a smaller hippocampus, which in turn limits functional capacity. A smaller hippocampus may result from subtle differences in the levels of transcription factors, such as NeuroD, Math1, or Lhx, signaling by Wnt3a and downstream mediator Lef1, or proliferative control mediated by bFGF, whose family members exhibit altered expression levels in schizophrenia brain samples. Such genetic limitations may only become manifest following another developmental challenge, such as gestational infection, stressors, or toxicant exposure. 
A regional locus of schizophrenia pathology remains uncertain but may include hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, multimodal association cortex, limbic system, amygdala, cingulate cortex, thalamus, and MTL. Despite size reductions in specific regions, attempts to define changes in cell numbers have been unrewarding, since most studies do not quantify the entire cell population, but only assess regional cell density. Without assessing a region’s total volume, cell density measures alone are limited in revealing population size. Most studies have found no changes in cell density in diverse regions. A single study successfully examining total cell number in hippocampus found normal neuron density and a 5 percent volume reduction on the left and 2 percent on the right, yielding no significant change in total cell number. 
In contrast to total neuron numbers, studies using neuronal cell type- specific markers have found a decreased density of GABA interneurons in cortex and hippocampus. In particular, parvalbumin-expressing interneurons are reduced, whereas calretinin containing cells are normal, suggesting a deficiency of an interneuron subtype. These morphometric data are supported by molecular evidence for decreased GABA neurons, including reduced mRNA and protein levels of the GABA synthesizing enzyme, GAD67, in cortex and hippocampus. Another product of the adult GABA secreting neurons, reelin, which initially appears in Cajal–Retzius cells in embryonic brain, is reduced 30 to 50 percent in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder with psychotic symptoms. Such a deficiency, leading to diminished GABA signaling, may underlie a potential compensatory increase in GABAa receptor binding detected in hippocampal CA2 to 4 fields by both pyramidal and nonpyramidal neurons, apparently selective since benzodiazepine binding is unchanged. More generally, deficiency in a subpopulation of GABA interneurons raises intriguing new possibilities for schizophrenia etiology. As indicated in the gene patterning section above, 

========239========

different subpopulations of GABA interneurons originate from distinct precursors located in the embryonic basal forebrain. Specifically, cortical and hippocampal GABA interneurons derive from the MGE under control of patterning gene Nkx2.1. Further, the timing and sequence of GABA interneuron generation depend on a regulatory network including Mash1, Dlx1/2, and Dlx5/6, all gene candidates for schizophrenia risk. Indeed, DLX1 gene expression is reduced in the thalamus of patients with psychosis. Thus abnormal regulation of these factors may diminish selectively GABA interneuron formation, which in turn may represent a genetically determined vulnerability, and may contribute to diminished regional brain size and/or function. 
The most compelling neuropathological evidence for a developmental basis is the finding of aberrantly localized or clustered neurons especially in lamina II of the entorhinal cortex and in the white matter underlying prefrontal cortex, and temporal and parahippocampal regions. These abnormalities represent alterations of developmental neuronal migration, survival and connectivity. In addition, in hippocampus and neocortex, pyramidal neurons appear smaller in many studies, exhibiting fewer dendritic arborizations and spines with reduced neuropil, findings that are associated with reductions in neuronal molecules including MAP2, spinophilin, synaptophysin, and SNAP25. 
Autism Spectrum Disorders 
Another condition that is clearly neurodevelopmental in origin is ASD, a complex and heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by abnormalities in social interaction and communication, and the presence of restricted/repetitive interests and activities. Based on the DSM-5 classification, the ASD now replaces the previously separate disorders of autistic disorder, Asperger syndrome, and pervasive developmental disorder-not otherwise specified. These three disorders are grouped together because of their common occurrence in families, indicating related genetic factors, and shared signs and symptoms which exhibit a wide range of symptom severity. Nonetheless, recent conceptualizations of ASD propose that there are multiple “autisms” differing in underlying pathogenetic mechanisms and manifestations. It is likely that the different core symptom domains (or other endophenotypes) will be more heritable than the syndromic diagnosis, which was constructed to be inclusive. The large diversity of ASD signs and symptoms reflects the multiplicity of abnormalities observed in pathological and functional studies, and include both forebrain and hindbrain regions. Forebrain neurons in the cerebral cortex and limbic system play critical roles in social interaction, communication, learning, and memory. For example, the amygdala, which connects to prefrontal and temporal cortex and fusiform gyrus, plays a prominent role in social and emotional cognition. In ASD, the amygdala 

========240========

and fusiform gyrus abnormally activate during facial recognition and emotional attribution tasks. Some investigators hypothesize that ASD reflects dysfunctions in specific neural networks, such as the social network. On the other hand, neurophysiological tests of evoked cortical potentials and oculomotor and auditory responses indicate normal perception of primary sensory information, but disturbed higher cognitive processing. The functional impairments in higher-order cognitive processing and neocortical circuitry suggest that this developmental disorder involves synaptic organization more broadly. This mechanism may be uniformly present throughout the brain, which is a model in distinct contrast to abnormalities of specific neural networks. Examples of such widely expressed molecules include those involved in pre- and postsynaptic adhesion and signaling including neurexins and neuroligins, as well as postsynaptic density (PSD) machinery, such as SHANK3 and mTOR. 
One of the most important discoveries in ASD pathogenesis is the widely reported and replicated brain growth phenotype. Starting with probably normal size at birth, the brain exhibits an accelerated increase in volume by the end of the first year compared to the typically developing child based on neuroimaging and head circumference measures, and this process continues from ages 2 to 4 years. It is not known whether this reflects an acceleration of normal developmental processes, or alternatively, a disease specific aberration in postnatal development, including changes in cell numbers, neuronal processes, synapse formation and pruning, or glial cell dysfunction, to name a few. The most prominent differences are observed in frontal and parietal cortex, cerebellar hemispheres, and the amygdala. These findings are also consistent with reports of macrocephaly in up to ~20 percent of ASD cases. 
Functional neuroimaging studies indicate broad forebrain but also cerebellar dysfunctions in ASD, and classical pathological studies suggested abnormalities that were restricted to limbic and cerebellar structures. However, classical studies were hampered by small sample size, poor control for co-morbidities like epilepsy and mental retardation, and use of tissue cell density measures as opposed to unbiased stereological methods to estimate neuron numbers. While previous studies described increased densities of small neurons in limbic nuclei, including CA fields, septum, mammillary bodies, and amygdala, other laboratories have not replicated these results. In contrast, the most consistent neuropathology has been observed in the cerebellum (21 of 29 brains), showing reductions in the number of Purkinje neurons without signs of acquired postnatal lesions, suggesting prenatal origins. 
A number of studies now identify widespread and nonuniform abnormalities, suggesting dysregulation of many processes, including neuron proliferation, migration, survival, organization, and programmed 

========241========

cell death. In cerebral cortex, neuropathology reveals thickened or diminished grey matter, disorganized laminar patterns, misoriented pyramidal neurons, ectopic neurons in both superficial and deep white matter, and increased or decreased neuron densities. This evidence of abnormal cortical neurogenesis and migration accords well with the deficits in cognitive functions. In brainstem, neuronal disorganization appeared as discontinuous and malpositioned neurons in olivary and dentate nuclei, ectopic neurons in medulla and cerebellar peduncles, and aberrant fiber tracts. There were widespread patchy or diffuse decreases of Purkinje neurons, sometimes associated with increased Bergmann glia, or ectopic Purkinje neurons in the molecular layer. Hippocampal neuronal atrophy was not observed, and quantitative stereology found no consistent change in neuron density or number. More recent studies define region-specific decreases in neuron numbers and/or neuron size in circuits involved in language and social communication, including the fusiform gyrus and inferior frontal cortex. While seemingly incompatible, these various data support a model of developmental abnormalities occurring at different times, altering regions according to specific schedules of neurogenesis and differentiation. Importantly, a similar range of abnormalities were found in classical studies but were originally discounted because they did not occur in every brain examined. 
Current analyses suggest that poorly defined environmental factors and multiple genetic factors interact to produce ASD. An early but rare environmental factor was the anti-nausea drug, thalidomide, which was found to be teratogenic. In 15 children exposed to thalidomide during days 20 to 24 of gestation, when cranial and Purkinje neurogenesis occurs in brainstem, four cases exhibited autism, suggesting that autism is associated with brain insults at 3 weeks. Another environmental factor is gestational exposure to VPA (Depakote). This anticonvulsant is given for seizures, mood disorders, and migraine prevention, but produces major congenital malformations and later life neurodevelopmental disorders. New clinical studies suggest that gestational insults, prematurity, and perinatal cerebellar injuries are major factors in ASD pathogenesis, an area that is under active study. 
Genetic factors play major roles in ASD etiology, and there are numerous available reviews. The genetic factors include changes that directly affect the ~20,000 of genes as well as others that alter noncoding DNA regions (~98 percent of the chromosomal material), that contain a wide variety of nuclear RNAs involved in regulating gene expression, such as miRNAs. Of the genes, it is now thought that between 500 and 1,000 genes may contribute to ASD risk, with these many genes acting on far fewer molecular pathways that control all aspects of development and function. For example, many genes fall into the category of developmental transcription factors, as described above in patterning, whereas others 

========242========

control synaptic structure and function, or regulate histone proteins that control gene expression. Some genetic factors are rare variants whose mutation occurs in the egg, sperm, or zygote, so-called de novo mutations, accounting for ~15 percent of ASD cases. These rare events produce major neuropsychiatric phenotypes in all persons who carry them. On the other hand, all persons carry common variants that produce small effects on phenotypes, a mechanism affecting many multifactorial diseases like diabetes and heart disease. It may be that ~40 to 50 percent of ASD risk depends on a collection of common variants to produce brain dysfunction, while they produce no disease when acting alone. However, the landscape of ASD genetics seems to be constantly changing, and current thoughts about mechanisms that were defined in relatively small populations (several hundreds to thousands) will surely change as studies employ tens of thousands of genetic samples. Furthermore, there are a number of monogenic syndromes that account for ~10 percent of cases, and these include tuberous sclerosis, Rett syndrome, fragile X mental retardation, neurofibromatosis, and Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome. While the genes underlying these monogenic disorders do not contribute to general idiopathic ASD, most of them point to one major locus for disease production: the synapse, where they control protein synthesis in response to synaptic activity, acting via the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway and the mTOR complex. This knowledge has led to a number of clinical trials in ASD that focus on altering synaptic activity. 
Methylmercury 
During development, the brain is sensitive to environmental toxicants that can act as teratogens, substances that injure the brain in reproducible patterns that reflect more the developmental period of exposure than the specific nature of the compound. Methylmercury (MeHg), a pervasive contaminant of fish and shellfish, is one of numerous environmental agents that alter developmental neurogenesis, and various epidemiological studies in frequent fish-eating populations show an association between prenatal exposure and cognitive deficits (learning and memory). Given the effects of MeHg exposure on learning and memory and the role of the hippocampus in these processes, it is reasonable to focus on neurogenesis that occurs in the hippocampal DG throughout development into adulthood. Extensive studies on the acute and long-term effects of MeHg on rat hippocampal neurogenesis reveal that there is a developmental period of vulnerability for proliferative cell types of the neurogenic cascade. In addition, these early insults can have lasting effects on later neurogenesis and can lead to the development of learning and memory deficits. 
Studies using postnatal day 7 (P7) rats, which is the peak of postnatal neurogenesis and corresponds to the third trimester of human brain development, assessed the effects of a single subcutaneous MeHg injection 

========243========

on hippocampal NSCs (Table 1.3–1). Twenty-four hours after exposure, biochemical and immunohistochemical analysis of the hippocampus revealed that there was a reduction of cells engaged in S-phase (BrdU), and that NSCs identified by expression of Sox2 and Nestin, underwent cell cycle arrest during the G1/S phase transition (due to cyclin E degradation). Subsequently, there was activation of the programmed cell death cascade including mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis (increased Bax, cytosolic cytochrome c, cleaved caspases 3 and 9). Consequently, 2 weeks later (P21), the volume of the DG was reduced, and many cells were diminished including the total number of granule neurons, the mitotic S-phase NSCs (particularly intermediate Tbr2+ progenitors), and the newly born DCX+ neurons. Furthermore, these early exposed rats developed hippocampal- dependent spatial learning and memory deficits (Morris water maze) in adolescence (P35). These findings demonstrate that NSCs appear to be the most vulnerable population in the hippocampus to MeHg during the first postnatal week, and that early toxicological insults have long-term effects on hippocampal structure and function. 
Similar studies performed in older rats using acute exposures (24 hours) also demonstrated that the developmental window of vulnerability to MeHg in the hippocampus ends between prepubescence (P14) and adolescence (P21). This is significant because children have higher susceptibility to neurotoxicants (such as organophosphate pesticides) than adults, thus it is important to define the period of developmental vulnerability to MeHg exposure in order to guide public policy. Similar to the P7 rat, acute exposure at P14 decreased the number of S-phase cells and NSCs after 24 hours, though the magnitude of change was smaller. However, there was no sign of vulnerability in the P21 hippocampus at either 24 or 48 hours postexposure. What is the nature of this changed vulnerability? The smaller magnitude of toxic insult at P14 compared to P7 might be due to unique properties of the juvenile BBB. During fetal development, tight junctions that provide a structural barrier against xenobiotics are formed and many transporters involved in influx and efflux mechanisms are expressed. However, there is evidence that expression levels of the neutral amino acid transporters, which are a known conduit for MeHg, are higher in the developing BBB than in the adult. This might suggest that older rodents absorb less MeHg into the brain, which results in milder insult upon exposure. Alternatively, regional expression of endogenous antioxidants such as glutathione might confer additional protection in the brain. For example, astrocytes (a rich source of glutathione precursors) isolated from the cerebellum have lower glutathione capacity and are therefore more sensitive to MeHg exposure than astrocytes from the cerebral cortex. Further, the increasing presence of glia that are generated during the postnatal period might also affect the MeHg burden to NSCs. Furthermore, microglia and astrocytes residing in 

========244========

the NSC niche secrete neurotrophic factors, which might provide protection against a MeHg insult. When cultured with neurons, astrocytes increase their uptake of MeHg, leading to reduced neuronal MeHg uptake and mitochondrial dysfunction. In summary, these results provide new knowledge of an expanded period of neurodevelopmental vulnerability that might inform national guidelines that regulate fish consumption during gestation and development. 
Drugs of Abuse 
Worldwide, substance abuse during pregnancy has been and remains a persistent public health problem. The majority of women who are addicted to drugs in the United States are of childbearing age, between 15 and 44. For decades, researchers have studied the effects of drug abuse on the developing brain. The consensus is that these children have a higher risk of developing cognitive deficits, as well as behavioral, social, emotional, and psychiatric problems. This is due to the fact that many drugs of abuse easily penetrate the placenta and fetal BBB to enter the brain, where they mimic and/or alter neurotransmitter and metabolic systems. Here, some of the most commonly used drugs during pregnancy are discussed: nicotine, cannabis (marijuana), and cocaine. 
Despite public awareness campaigns, nicotine is still one of the most commonly used drugs of abuse during pregnancy. According to a CDC report (Trends in Smoking Before, During, and After Pregnancy— Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System, United States, 40 Sites, 2000–2010), about 10 percent of women admitted to smoking tobacco during the third trimester. Smoking during pregnancy increases the mother’s chance of miscarriage, premature birth, low birth weight, and sudden infant death syndrome. It is also associated with cognitive, language, and attention deficits, behavioral and psychiatric disorders, and an increased likelihood of drug addiction later in life. Nicotine, the primary addictive substance in tobacco smoke, acts as an agonist on nicotinic cholinergic receptors (nAChRs). Since nAChRs are expressed by brainstem dopamine neurons, exposure to nicotine during development might lead to permanent alterations in the mesolimbic pathway that mediates reward. 
Table 1.3–1. 
Neurodevelopmental Vulnerability to Methylmercury in P7 Rats Time 
post- 
exposure 24 hours 2 weeks 4 weeks 
Neural stem cells undergo cell Smaller DG volume and total Hippocampal-dependent 
cycle arrest at G1/S cell number spatial learning and 
transition Reduction of intermediate memory deficits 
Neural stem cells undergo cell progenitor cells in S-phase 

========245========

death via intrinsic mitochondrial apoptosis 
and newborn neurons 
Short- and long-term effects of P7 MeHg exposure on hippocampal neurogenesis and function in the rat. In the short-term (24 h), MeHg causes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of hippocampal neural stem cells. The cell deficit resulting from this early insult is not fully rectified by adolescence (P21); evidenced by a smaller dentate gyrus (due to lower cell number), and fewer S-phase intermediate progenitors and newborn neurons. By 4 weeks (P35), animals display deficits in hippocampal-dependent spatial learning and memory tasks. 
Cannabis (from the Cannabis sativa plant) is the most commonly used illicit drug among pregnant women. Though the main psychoactive ingredient, δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), readily crosses the placenta, less appears to enter fetal blood compared to other drugs. In addition, studies show that in many species, fetal THC concentrations tend to be lower than maternal concentrations. However, cannabis exposure does impair blood flow to the fetus, which in turn can have deleterious effects on brain development. THC mimics the endocannabinoid neurotransmitter, anandamide, by targeting cannabinoid G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCR) type 1 and 2 (CB1R, CB2R). CB1R in particular is expressed as early as the pre-implantation period of gestation. During development, CB1R activity and synthesis (and secretion) of another endocannabinoid 2- arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) occurs in the growth cones of developing neurons. When the growth cone reaches its final destination for synapse formation, 2-AG is naturally degraded by monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL). However, MAGL cannot degrade THC, thus exposure to THC during neuronal development can disturb axon growth and synapse formation. Longitudinal epidemiological and animal studies have found that prenatal cannabis exposure is associated with lower birth weight, learning and memory deficits, and increased anxiety. 
Cocaine is the third most commonly used illicit drug in the United States. It easily crosses the placenta and BBB and produces severe deleterious effects on the developing brain. Like METH, it primarily affects monoamine neurotransmitter systems, by serving as a triple monoamine (dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine) reuptake inhibitor. This has a severe effect on cortical neuronal development that depends on the neurotrophic functions of monoamines, and the mesolimbic reward pathway. Brain regions that regulate executive function and attention appear to be the most vulnerable to prenatal cocaine exposure. Exposed children are born with lower IQ, learning, language (mild), and memory deficits. 
POSTNATAL NEUROGENESIS IN MAMMALS: SUBVENTRICULAR ZONE AND HIPPOCAMPUS 
For the past few decades, there has been a fundamental shift in paradigm 

========246========

regarding the limits of neurogenesis in the brain, with important implications for neural plasticity, mechanisms of disease etiology and therapy, and possibilities of repair. For most of the 20th century, the notion was that humans do not produce new neurons in the brain after birth (or soon thereafter, considering cerebellar EGL), thus brain plasticity and repair depends on modifications of a numerically static neural network. The contrary principle (with strong evidence from numerous studies) that new neurons are generated throughout life in certain regions is now accepted. This concept is well documented across the phylogenetic tree, including birds, rodents, primates, and humans. As an area of intense interest and investigation, psychiatrists may expect rapid progress over the next two decades, likely altering models described herein. 
In this context, neurogenesis is the generation of new neurons from neural precursors. Scientists who observed 
3H-thymidine 
labeled neurons (a common marker for cell proliferation) in tissue reported the first evidence of mammalian neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus in the 1960s. Cell proliferation is defined as an absolute increase in cell number, which occurs only if cell production is not balanced by cell death. More recent studies of neurogenesis employ the more convenient thymidine analogs BrdU and 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU), which can be injected into living animals and then detected by immunohistochemistry. 
During embryonic development, neurons are produced from almost all regions of the ventricular neuroepithelium. However, postnatal (from birth to puberty) and adult neurogenesis are largely restricted to two regions: the SVZ lining the lateral ventricles, and a narrow proliferative zone underlying the DG granule layer SGZ in the hippocampus. In mice, rodents, and monkeys, newly produced neurons migrate from the SVZ in an anterior direction toward the olfactory bulb to become GABA (and dopamine)-​- containing interneurons. The process has been elegantly characterized at both ultrastructural and molecular levels (Table 1.3–1). In the SVZ, the neuroblasts (A cells) on their way to the olfactory bulb create chains of cells, and migrate through a scaffold of glial cells supplied by slowly dividing astrocytes (B cells). Within this network of cell chains, there are groups of rapidly dividing neural precursors (C cells). Evidence suggests that the B cells give rise to the C cells which later develop into the A cells, the future olfactory bulb interneurons. The existence of a sequence of precursors with progressively restricted abilities to generate diverse neural cell types makes defining mechanisms regulating adult neurogenesis in vivo a great challenge. 
Studies in rodents show that adult neurogenesis is regulated by extracellular signals (such as EGF, bFGF, IGF-I, BDNF, LIF/CNTF) that control precursor proliferation and survival. In turn, precursor proliferation and survival also modulate expression and activity of these factors. While the hallmark of NSCs includes the capacity to generate 

========247========

neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendroglia, termed multi-potentiality, specific signals appear to produce relatively different profiles of cells that may migrate to distinct sites. Intraventricular infusion of EGF promotes primarily gliogenesis in the SVZ, with cells migrating to olfactory bulb, striatum, and corpus callosum, whereas bFGF favors generation of neurons destined for the olfactory bulb. Both factors appear to stimulate mitosis directly, with differential effects on the cell lineage produced. In contrast, BDNF may increase neuron formation in SVZ as well as striatum and hypothalamus, though effects may be primarily through promoting survival of newly generated neurons that otherwise undergo cell death. Finally, CNTF and related LIF may promote gliogenesis, or alternatively, support self-renewal of adult stem cells rather than enhancing a specific cell category. 
In addition to direct intraventricular infusions, peripheral levels of growth factors, hormones, and neuropeptides also affect adult neurogenesis. Peripheral administration of both bFGF and IGF-I stimulate neurogenesis, selectively increasing mitotic labeling in the SVZ and hippocampal SGZ, respectively, suggesting there are specific mechanisms for factor transport across the BBB. Interestingly, elevated prolactin levels, induced by peripheral injection or natural pregnancy, stimulate proliferation of progenitors in the mouse SVZ (Fig. 1.3–11), leading to increased olfactory bulb interneurons, potentially playing roles in maternal learning of the new infant’s scents. This may be relevant to changes in prolactin seen in psychiatric disease. Conversely, in behavioral paradigms of social stress, such as territorial challenge by male intruders, activation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis with increased glucocorticoids leads to reduced neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Inhibition is also observed after peripheral opiate administration, a model for substance abuse. Thus, neurogenesis may be one target process affected by changes of hormones and neuropeptides associated with several psychiatric conditions. 

========248========

FIGURE 1.3–11. Adult neural stem cells localize to the lateral ventricular wall. This drawing shows a cross-section of the adult mouse brain with the boxed area representing an enlargement of the subventricular zone, based on electron microscopic ultrastructural studies. Ciliated ependymal cells (E) line the lateral ventricles (LVs), and behind this lining, astrocytes (B) can be found. These glial cells give rise to dividing precursor cells (C), which in turn generate the neuroblasts (A). The neuroblasts migrate to the olfactory bulb by forming chains of cells within glial tunnels composed of astrocytes. The B cell is considered a stem cell that renews itself on each division, indicated by the circular arrow, as well as gives rise to dividing precursors fated to become neurons. (From Alvarez-Buylla A, Seri B, Doetsch F. Identification of neural stem cells in the adult vertebrate brain. Brain Res Bull. 2002;57:751, with permission.) 
The discovery of adult neurogenesis naturally leads to questions about whether new neurons can integrate into the complex cytoarchitecture of the mature brain, and the functional significance. In rodents, primates, and humans, new neurons are generated in the DG of the hippocampus, an area important for learning and memory. Some adult-generated neurons in humans have been shown to survive for at least 2 years. Further, newly generated cells in adult mouse hippocampus have extensive dendritic and axonal arborizations appropriate to the neural circuit, and display functional synaptic inputs and action potentials. From a functional perspective, the generation and/or survival of new neurons correlate strongly with multiple instances of behavioral learning and experience. For example, survival of newly generated neurons is markedly enhanced by hippocampal-dependent learning tasks and by an enriched, behaviorally complex environment. Of perhaps greater importance, a reduction in DG neurogenesis impairs the formation of trace memories, that is, when an animal must associate stimuli that are separated in time, a hippocampal- dependent task. Finally, in songbirds, neurogenesis is activity-dependent, and is increased by foraging for food and learning new song, whether it occurs seasonally or is induced by steroid hormone administration. 
From clinical and therapeutic perspectives, scientists have observed that changes in neurogenesis can contribute to disease or help the brain 

========249========

recover from injury. A neurogenetic response has been shown for multiple pathological conditions in the adult, including brain trauma, stroke, and epilepsy. For instance, ischemic stroke in the striatum stimulates adjacent SVZ neurogenesis (Fig. 1.3–11), with neurons migrating to the injury site. Furthermore, in a highly selective paradigm not involving local tissue damage, degeneration of cerebral cortical layer III pyramidal neurons elicited SVZ neurogenesis and cell replacement. These studies raise the possibility that newly produced neurons normally participate in recovery, and may be stimulated as a novel therapeutic strategy. However, neurogenesis can also play roles in pathogenesis. In a kindling model of epilepsy, newly generated neurons migrated to incorrect positions and formed aberrant neuronal circuits, reenforcing the epileptic state. Conversely, reductions in neurogenesis can contribute to several conditions that implicate dysfunction or degeneration of the hippocampal formation. DG neurogenesis is inhibited by increased glucocorticoids levels observed in aged rats and is reversed by steroid antagonists and adrenalectomy. These observations are potentially relevant to the correlation of elevated human cortisol levels with reduced hippocampal volumes and the presence of memory deficits. Similarly, stress-induced increases in human glucocorticoids may contribute to decreased hippocampal volumes seen in schizophrenia, depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
Studies in the area of postnatal and adult human neurogenesis are still nascent, but recent findings suggest that the magnitude of new neuron generation in the human DG is comparable to that in rodents. In adult rats, monkeys, and humans, the number of new hippocampal neurons generated daily amounts to approximately 0.2 percent, 0.02 percent, and 0.004 percent of the total granule cell population, respectively. However, there are some differences between rodent and human neurogenesis. Unlike rodents, humans do not appear to have evident neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb, and age-dependent decline of neurogenesis in humans does not follow the sharp decline that is normally seen in rodents. 
Hippocampal neurogenesis seems to provide an avenue for incorporating new memories and information. Thus, a balance is made between adding new information and retaining previously stored information. In the hippocampus, new granule neurons integrate into the existing neuronal network, forming new connections that might replace or cooperate with older, established synaptic connections. If the established connections are replaced, memories are forgotten because the previously stored information is lost. Sigmund Freud coined the term “infantile amnesia” to describe the phenomenon of the inability of adult humans to recall declarative (facts and events) memories from their first few years of life, followed by patchy memory recall until the age of 7. Recent studies are testing the neurogenic hypothesis of infantile amnesia, which states that high levels of postnatal hippocampal neurogenesis lead to the replacement 

========250========

of preexisting synaptic connections, which inhibits the ability to form long- lasting memories. The age-related decline in neurogenesis rate results in lower turnover of established synaptic connections, and is therefore accompanied by a higher ability to form long-lasting memories. Overall, findings in rodents suggest that increasing neurogenesis after the acquisition of memories causes forgetting, while genetically or pharmacologically reducing neurogenesis reduces forgetting. 
Defining the effects of hippocampal postnatal neurogenesis on memory can also provide clues as to why memory formation and retention changes with age. Although the human brain is fully developed by birth, the DG of the hippocampus undergoes significant development postnatally. Thus, it is not surprising that the ability to retain declarative memories can be affected by postnatal neurogenesis. Precocial animals such as the degu and guinea pig tend to have low levels of postnatal neurogenesis compared to nonprecocial animals, because the majority of granule cells are generated prenatally. Thus, nearly complete DG development in precocial animals by birth allows for superior memory retention during infancy. Studies comparing memory retention in precocial and nonprecocial animals (i.e., rat) have shown that retention of memories (acquired via learning a place discrimination task) in guinea pigs was not age-dependent, whereas in rats, older animals remembered the task better than those trained at a younger age. However, infantile amnesia can be induced experimentally in precocial animals by genetically or pharmacologically increasing levels of hippocampal neurogenesis. In humans, the age-dependent decline in hippocampal neurogenesis might reflect an intricate balance between encoding and forgetting. In early life, the high neurogenesis rate favors forgetting in order to retain only the most important memories in a highly demanding sensory environment. 
New hippocampal neurons (and stem and progenitor cells) that are generated during adulthood are implicated in response to treatments for mood disorders such as depression. Indeed, so much research on the effects to adult neurogenesis of antidepressant treatment has occurred in the past decade that the neurogenic hypothesis of depression was formed to link the research together. It states that antidepressant efficacy and mood control depend on the continued generation of new neurons in the adult hippocampus. So far, there have been no human studies that have tested the contribution of adult hippocampal neurogenesis to antidepressant efficacy, but recent research reveals similarities with findings from rodent depression model studies that show correlations between antidepressant treatment and enhanced hippocampal neurogenesis. In postmortem and MRI studies in patients with depression, researchers observed a smaller DG and lower granule cell numbers compared to healthy controls, which may be as a result of reduced neurogenesis. Furthermore, correlative increases in anxiety and depression have been observed in patients 

========251========

undergoing cancer treatments such as irradiation, which is known to reduce hippocampal neurogenesis. Conversely, antidepressant treatment in patients appears to cause the hippocampus to grow larger (defined through postmortem and MRI studies), leading to increased DG size and granule cell number. Similar findings have been observed in NHPs, where antidepressant treatment restored normal neurogenesis levels in stressed monkeys that exhibited clinical responses. It is thought that mechanisms of antidepressant actions are similar to those mediating stress-coping responses. 
Current studies demonstrate that adult neurogenesis in the SVZ has potential links to the development of neurodegenerative and psychiatric disease. Recently, the fate of neuroblasts generated from NSCs of the human SVZ (from studies in postmortem human brain tissue) was discovered. In infant brains, researchers found migrating immature neurons in the SVZ and rostral migratory stream to the olfactory bulb. Proliferating cells were also found in the human SVZ, but their numbers (as well as the migrating neuroblasts) decreased drastically within the first 18 months of life. By adulthood, very few migrating neuroblasts were found in these same regions. The mechanisms guiding this drastic decline are not known, but it can be concluded that neurogenesis in the human SVZ undergoes dramatic changes throughout the life span. More recently, the medial migratory system (MMS) was discovered only in 4- to 6-month human brain tissue, where many neuroblasts (some expressing interneuron markers tyrosine hydroxylase and calretinin) migrate to the VMPFC. This discovery of SVZ neurogenesis to the prefrontal cortex might provide clues to the etiology of mental disorders such as schizophrenia, especially if neurogenesis is altered. What is not yet known is the function of these neurons in the prefrontal cortex. A recent study observed neural precursors (which generate interneurons) in the SVZ that borders the striatum, and their loss is implicated in the development of Huntington disease. Techniques such as nuclear proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-NMR and 1H-MRS) are currently being used to visualize human neural precursor cells (hNPCs) live and in vivo by identifying hNPC-specific metabolites. In one study, a 1.28-ppm biomarker on the 1H- NMR spectra was established to be NPC-specific. Thus, peaks at this spectrum were detected live in neurogenic human brain regions such as the hippocampus but not in the cortex. Not surprisingly, the amplitude of these peaks decreased with the age (prepubescent, adolescent, adult) of the brain. Though quality control considerations are yet to be ironed out, this technology shows great promise for elucidating alterations in neurogenesis for patients with neurodevelopmental, psychiatric, and neurodegenerative disorders. 
More generally, the discovery of adult neurogenesis has led to major changes in psychiatrists’ perspectives on the regenerative capacities of the 

========252========

human brain. 
REFERENCES 
Aimone JB, Li Y, Lee SW, Clemenson GD, Deng W, Gage FH. Regulation and function of adult neurogenesis: From genes to cognition. Physiological Reviews. 2014;94:991–1026. 
Alvarez-Buylla A, Seri B, Doetsch F. Identification of neural stem cells in the adult vertebrate brain. Brain Res Bull. 2002;57:751–758. 
Amaral DG, Schumann CM, Nordahl CW. Neuroanatomy of autism. Trends in Neurosci. 2008;31:137–145. 
Behnke M, Smith VC, Committee on Substance Abuse; Committee on Fetus and Newborn. Prenatal substance abuse: Short- and long-term effects on the exposed fetus. Pediatrics. 2013;131:e1009–e1024. 
Bishop KM, Goudreau G, O’Leary DD. Regulation of area identity in the mammalian neocortex by Emx2 and Pax6. Science. 2000;288:344–349. 
Cheng Y, Black IB, DiCicco-Bloom E. Hippocampal granule neuron production and population size are regulated by levels of bFGF. Eur J Neurosci. 2002;15:3–12. 
DiCicco-Bloom E, Lord C, Zwaigenbaum L, et al. The developmental neurobiology of autism spectrum disorder. J Neurosci. 2006;26:6897–6906. 
Eriksson PS, Perfilieva E, Björk-Eriksson T, et al. Neurogenesis in adult human hippocampus. Nat Med. 1998;4:1313–1317. 
Ernst A, Alkass K, Bernard S, et al. Neurogenesis in the striatum of the adult human brain. Cell. 2014;156:1072–1083. 
Falluel-Morel A, Sokolowski K, Sisti HM, et al. Developmental mercury exposure elicits acute hippocampal cell death, reductions in neurogenesis, and severe learning deficits during puberty. Journal Neurochem. 2007;103:1968–1981. 
Fukuchi-Shimogori T, Grove EA. Neocortex patterning by the secreted signaling molecule FGF8. Science. 2001;294:1071–1074. 
Guillemot F. Cell fate specification in the mammalian telencephalon. Prog Neurobiol. 2007;83:37–52. 
Hansen DV, Lui JH, Parker PR, Kriegstein AR. Neurogenic radial glia in the outer subventricular zone of human neocortex. Nature. 2010;464:554–561. 
Heckers S, Konradi C. Hippocampal neurons in schizophrenia. J Neural Transm. 2002;109:891– 905. 
Hevner RF. Layer-specific markers as probes for neuron type identity in human neocortex and malformations of cortical development. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2007;66:101–109. Josselyn SA, Frankland PW. Infantile amnesia: a neurogenic hypothesis. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. 2012;19:423–433. 
Kempermann G, Gage FH. Neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Novartis Found Symp. 2000;231:220–235. 
Kohlmeier KA. Nicotine during pregnancy: changes induced in neurotransmission, which could heighten proclivity to addict and induce maladaptive control of attention. Journal of Dev Origins of Health and Disease. 2014;11:1. 
LaMonica BE, Lui JH, Wang X, Kriegstein AR. OSVZ progenitors in the human cortex: an 

========253========

updated perspective on neurodevelopmental disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2012;5:747–753. Lewis DA. Inhibitory neurons in human cortical circuits: substrate for cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia. Current Opinion in Neurobiol. 2014;26:22–26. 
Lewitus E, Kelava I, Huttner WB. Conical expansion of the outer subventricular zone and the role of neocortical folding in evolution and development. Frontiers in Human Neurosci. 2013;7:424. 
Mairet-Coello G, Tury A, Van Buskirk E, Robinson K, Genestine M, DiCicco-Bloom E. p57KIP2 regulates radial glia and intermediate precursor cell cycle dynamics and lower layer neurogenesis in developing cerebral cortex. Development. 2012;139:475. 
Miller BR, Hen R. The current state of the neurogenic theory of depression and anxiety. Current Opinion in Neurobiol. 2015;30:51–58. 
Monuki ES, Walsh CA. Mechanisms of cerebral cortical patterning in mice and humans. Nat Neurosci. 2001;4:1199–1206. 
MuhChyi C, Juliandi B, Matsuda T, Nakashima K. Epigenetic regulation of neural stem cell fate during corticogenesis. International Journal of Dev Neurosci. 2013;31:424–433. 
Nadarajah B, Parnavelas JG. Modes of neuronal migration in the developing cerebral cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2002;3:423–432. 
Noctor SC, Flint AC, Weissman TA, Dammerman RS, Kriegstein AR. Neurons derived from radial glial cells establish radial units in neocortex. Nature. 2001;409:714–720. 
O’Leary DD, Sahara S. Genetic regulation of arealization of the neocortex. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2008;1:90–100. 
Reynolds BA, Weiss S. Generation of neurons and astrocytes from isolated cells of the adult mammalian central nervous system. Science. 1992;255:1707–1710. 
Ross CA, Margolis RL, Reading SAJ, Plentikof M, Coyle JT. Neurobiology of schizophrenia. Neuron. 2006;52:139–153. 
Shors TJ, Miesegaes G, Beylin A, Zhao M, Rydel T, Gould E. Neurogenesis in the adult is involved in the formation of trace memories. Nature. 2001;410:372–376. 
Sokolowski K, Obiorah M, Robinson K, McCandlish E, Buckley B, DiCicco-Bloom E. Neural stem cell apoptosis after low methylmercury (MeHg) exposures in postnatal hippocampus produce persistent cell loss and adolescent memory deficits. Dev Neurobiol. 2013;73:936–949. Vaccarino FM, Schwartz ML, Raballo R, et al. Changes in cerebral cortex size are governed by fibroblast growth factor during embryogenesis. Nat Neurosci. 1999;2:848. 
van Praag H, Schinder AF, Christie BR, Toni N, Palmer TD, Gage FH. Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature. 2002;415:1030. 
▲ 1.4 Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters 
JOHN D. ELSWORTH, PH.D., AND ROBERT H. ROTH, PH.D. 
INTRODUCTION 
The biogenic amine neurotransmitters are the catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine) and serotonin (5-​hydroxytryptamine, 

========254========

5HT), histamine, and acetylcholine. The importance of biogenic amines is demonstrated by their implication in the pathophysiology and treatment of 
a wide variety neurotransmitters 
of psychiatric have an 
and 
neurological disorders. These but functionally significant 
some more 
unusual 
organization in the CNS. Their cell bodies are restricted to a small number of nuclei in the midbrain, brain stem, basal forebrain, and hypothalamus; yet their axons project throughout the whole CNS, 
topographically than others. It is well known that these systems play critical roles in cognition, memory, motivation, and motor function and 
arousal. 
This 
widely 
projecting 
permits 
each 
of 
these 
influence 
neurotransmitters to modulate activity in diverse circuits throughout the CNS, sometimes in a coordinated fashion. This complex anatomical organization poses a major challenge to understand the precise cellular, molecular, and system level pathways by which these neurotransmitters impact neuropsychiatric disorders. It is also important to realize that a pharmacological treatment can be clinically effective even though it may not directly target the specific biological deficit causing the symptoms. 
Recent advances in human genetics and genomics, as well as 
experimental 
neuroscience, 
have 
revealed some insights into 
the 
evidence of tantalizing links monoamine-related genes and 
complexity of these neurotransmitter systems. Molecular cloning has identified a large number of genes that regulate monoaminergic neurotransmission, such as the enzymes, receptors, and transporters that mediate the synthesis, cellular actions, and cellular reuptake of these neurotransmitters, respectively. Human genetics studies have provided 
between 
receptor 
subtypes 
exist 
for 
allelic psychiatric 
variants in specific disorders and trait 
biogenic 
amine 
transmitter. 
abnormalities, while the ability to modify gene function and cellular activity in experimental animals has clarified the roles of specific genes and neural pathways in mediating behavioral processes. 
In this chapter, highlight for each of the biogenic amines the details of its life cycle (incorporating synthetic and metabolic enzymes and transporters) are highlighted together with their receptors. Ultimately, the effects of biogenic amines on CNS function and behavior depend upon their interactions with receptor molecules. The binding of biogenic amines to these plasma membrane proteins initiates a series of intracellular events that modulate neuronal excitability. Unlike the transporters, multiple 
each 
Neurotransmitter receptors produce intracellular effects by one of two basic mechanisms: (1) by interactions with G proteins that couple receptors to intracellular effector systems and (2) by providing channels through which ions flow when transmitters bind (ligand-gated ion channels). The neurotransmitters receptors covered in this chapter with the exception of the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor subtype and the cholinergic nicotinic 

========255========

receptors all belong to the superfamily of GPCRs. However, within each neurotransmitter receptor group, the subtypes are heterogeneous with regard to the G proteins with which they interact and to the second messenger effects that they produce. Receptors are also diverse in their regional patterns of expression within the brain, their neurotransmitter binding affinities, and their synaptic localization. Whereas many receptor subtypes are located exclusively in postsynaptic membranes, others are located presynaptically and some both pre- and postsynaptically. Some receptors on the presynaptic terminal respond to a transmitter that is released by that neuron; these presynaptic “autoreceptors” often act to inhibit neurotransmitter release. When a receptor for a particular transmitter is located on terminals of a different transmitter it is a “heteroreceptor,” and its activation can increase or decrease release. 
Much recent effort has been focused on determining the functional roles of individual neurotransmitter receptor subtypes. Limited availability of selective agonist and antagonist drugs hampers this effort, but recent advances in gene manipulation and targeted gene editing is advancing the fields of neuroscience and pharmacology considerably. Such studies in animals are providing clues to receptor function and to the contributions of each receptor to the actions of nonspecific drugs. It is anticipated that the next generation of subtype-selective compounds will lead to novel therapeutic agents that alter biogenic amine transmission in a more refined manner. 
DOPAMINE AND NOREPINEPHRINE 
Dopamine Anatomy and Functions 
The majority of dopaminergic innervation in brain is provided by long projection neurons arising from two clusters of cell bodies in the midbrain (mesencephalon), the substantia nigra, and the VTA. Neurons from the substantia nigra provide a dense input to the dorsal striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen), while projections from the VTA principally target limbic regions (e.g., nucleus accumbens and septum) in addition to cortical regions (e.g., prefrontal cortex and cingulate cortex). It should also be noted though, that it is not possible to completely segregate the motor, motivational, and cognitive behaviors that are often attributed to the striatal, limbic, and cortical dopamine systems, respectively. 
Dysfunction in striatal dopamine transmission is strongly associated with movement disorders such as Parkinson disease or tardive dyskinesia. The hallmark signs of Parkinson disease originate from a loss of striatal dopaminergic innervation. Tardive dyskinesia can occur following high- dose or long-term exposure to certain antipsychotic drugs that block dopamine receptors. It is apparent that nigrostriatal dopamine neurons do not merely allow motor behavior to occur, but that they also play an 

========256========

important role in the selection and initiation of actions and establishing motor skills and habits. Nigrostriatal dopamine neurons display a uniquely complex arborization of terminals. This large architecture together with the unmyelinated nature of its axons puts the nigrostriatal dopamine neuron under a phenomenal energy demand and probably is a critical factor in their particular susceptibility to a variety of biochemical and pharmacological insults. 
Dopamine neurons arising in the VTA and terminating in the frontal cortex play an important role in attention, working memory. Dopamine neurons innervating limbic regions such as nucleus accumbens are strongly implicated in goal-oriented (motivated) behaviors, in addition to reward, attention, and pharmacologically induced locomotion. Enhancement of dopamine transmission in mesolimbic system has been linked with the addicting, reinforcing, and sensitizing effects of repeated exposure to psychostimulant drugs of abuse. Tourette syndrome and ADHD have been linked to a dysfunction of dopaminergic neurotransmission in limbic and cortical regions, based mainly on the success of dopaminergic drugs in treatment of their symptoms. The oldest and most established hypothesis of schizophrenia posits that the disease is related to excessive central dopamine activity in striatal and limbic regions. A revision to the hypothesis is the concept of reduced cortical dopamine transmission together with overactivity in subcortical dopamine systems. 
Anterior to the mesencephalic substantia nigra and VTA, are several other relatively small groups of dopaminergic cell bodies. The most prominent of these are the tuberoinfundibular dopamine neurons, which are located in arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus and project to the median eminence. Dopamine released from these neurons enters the circulation and is transported to the anterior pituitary where it inhibits the release of prolactin from the anterior lobe of the pituitary. Antipsychotic drugs that block dopamine receptors in the pituitary induce an increase in blood prolactin levels. 
Electrophysiological studies have shown that dopamine cells fire in two different modes, either single spiking or burst firing, presumably as a result of a change in balance between excitatory and inhibitory inputs. As cells are able to switch between these levels, the transition in activity may be a mechanism for altering the impact of dopamine neurotransmission on receptive cells. Bursting activity elicits more terminal dopamine release per action potential than pacemaker activity, and bursting appears to elicit release of peptide co-transmitters more readily than nonbursting patterns. The different rates of firing of dopamine neurons probably code different responses in the brain. At the fastest scale, with burst firing, dopamine neurons can signal a reward, or to indicate to what extent a reward occurs differently than predicted. At the slowest time scale, the pacemaker activity of dopamine neurons has been linked to a tonic enabling function on a 

========257========

variety of motor, cognitive, and motivational processes, which are deficient in Parkinson disease and which can be restored by dopamine replacement therapy. 
In addition to the DA systems in the brain and pituitary, dopamine appears to have a restricted role in the periphery. The best-defined role for peripheral dopamine neurons is in renal regulation of sodium homeostasis, and impairment of this control may underlie development of hypertension in some cases. Another important function of dopamine outside the brain is in various retinal processes, including light adaptation and contrast sensitivity. 
Norepinephrine Anatomy and Functions 
The widespread norepinephrine (“noradrenergic”) innervation in brain mainly derives from a very small cluster of neurons located in the locus coeruleus (LC, part of the pons) in addition to a more diffuse grouping in the lateral tegmental area (part of the midbrain). These two groups provide input to virtually all brain regions, with LC neurons primarily targeting the forebrain, thalamus, cerebellum, and spinal cord and the lateral tegmental neurons principally sending fibers to the hypothalamus and basal forebrain. A single norepinephrine neuron typically innervates several brain regions. LC norepinephrine neurons exhibit different activity modes: tonic firing with short periods of burst firing. Alterations in the tonic mode are associated with the sleep–waking cycle, whereas the phasic mode occurs in response to arousing stimuli. There is good evidence for an important role of LC norepinephrine neurons in vigilance, attention, and working memory. 
Epinephrine Anatomy and Functions 
In the sympathetic nervous system (ANS) and the adrenal medulla, epinephrine shares with norepinephrine the role of final neurotransmitter, and the proportion of this sharing is species-dependent and hormonally modified. Relatively few epinephrine cells exist in brain and are found in the medulla, providing innervation to subregions of hypothalamus. 
Life Cycle of Dopamine, Norepinephrine and Epinephrine 
Synthesis. These three catecholamine neurotransmitters share a common synthetic pathway (Fig. 1.4–1). Blood-borne tyrosine, derived from dietary proteins and from phenylalanine metabolism, enters the brain by the large neutral amino acid (LNAA) transport system. Tyrosine in brain extracellular fluid is taken up into catecholamine neurons by a high affinity amino acid transporter. In the first reaction tyrosine is converted to L-dopa by the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase in the cytosol. Because this step is rate limiting, it sets the pace for the conversion of tyrosine to dopamine, which 

========258========

makes this step the most susceptible to physiologic regulation and pharmacologic manipulation. Tyrosine hydroxylase requires tetrahydrobiopterin as a cofactor, and the synthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin is itself dependent on the activity of another enzyme, GTP-​cyclohydrolase- 1. The next reaction is the decarboxylation of L-dopa by aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) in the cytosol to form dopamine. AADC decarboxylates L-dopa so avidly that the level of this amino acid in brain is very low under normal conditions. L-dopa is the principal drug used to treat Parkinson disease as it restores the deficient striatal dopamine level that occurs in the disorder. Supplying exogenous L-dopa to the neuron ensures efficient conversion to dopamine because it bypasses tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting step in dopamine biosynthesis. An inhibitor of AADC that does not cross the BBB (e.g., carbidopa or benserazide) is routinely administered with levodopa to patients with Parkinson disease to inhibit the peripheral decarboxylation of L-dopa to dopamine, which reduces peripheral side effects resulting from abnormally high circulating levels of dopamine. One prominent side-effect of excessive circulating dopamine is emesis due to the activation of dopamine receptors in the area postrema, an area outside the BBB. In fact, D2 antagonists (e.g., promethazine [Phenergan]) are a widely used class of antiemetic agents. However, because they are prone to induce parkinsonian-like side effects, alternatives such as 5HT3 antagonists (e.g., ondansetron [Zofran]) and neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists (e.g., aprepitant [Emend]) are increasingly used to avoid these problems associated with D2 antagonism. 

========259========


========260========

FIGURE 1.4–1. Biosynthesis of dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. The catecholamine neurotransmitters are produced by a multistep synthesis that starts with the dietary amino acid, tyrosine. Dopamine neurons contain the enzymes TH and AADC, whereas norepinephrine neurons also express DBH. PNMT is an additional enzyme that is present only in epinephrine neurons. AADC, aromatic amino acid decarboxylase; DBH, dopamine-β-hydroxylase; PNMT, phenol-N-methyltransferase. 
In norepinephrine neurons, as well as in chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla, an additional enzyme, dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) is present that enables the conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine. This enzyme is concentrated inside the storage vesicles, so this step of norepinephrine synthesis does not occur in the cytoplasm. Disulfiram (Antabuse), a drug used to treat alcohol addiction, is an inhibitor of DBH. However, the principal relevant property of disulfiram in treating alcoholism is to block acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, the enzyme that metabolizes acetaldehyde formed from ethanol, and this results in elevated acetaldehyde levels that causes moderate to severe adverse effects after consumption of ethanol. 
In central epinephrine neurons and in adrenal medulla and heart, norepinephrine is N-methylated by the enzyme phenylethanolamine-N- methyltransferase (PNMT) to form epinephrine. As PNMT is located in the cytoplasm, norepinephrine has to exit its storage site in vesicles to be converted to epinephrine before being transported back into vesicles. This reaction presumably takes place during spontaneous leakage of norepinephrine from vesicles in cytoplasm, or after norepinephrine has been released into the synapse and taken back up into the cytoplasm and exposed to PNMT. 
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a rare genetic disease caused by a mutation in the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase, which hampers synthesis of tyrosine as well as disturbing other metabolic pathways of phenylalanine. The elevated concentrations of phenylalanine seen in PKU has devastating effects on the developing brain typically leading to severe mental retardation unless steps are taken to limit dietary intake of phenylalanine. Newborns identified with such mutation can avoid symptoms of PKU by eliminating phenylalanine from their diet. 
Vesicular Transporter. Vesicles present in the presynaptic terminals are specialized for the uptake and storage of catecholamines, thus protecting the transmitter from degradation by the enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO) found in mitochondria. The accumulation and concentration of transmitter inside the vesicles is accomplished by vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT). There are two forms of VMAT and it is VMAT-2 that is expressed in central neurons. 
Dopamine Plasma Membrane Transporter. 
A high-affinity DAT serves to 

========261========

recapture released dopamine and limits the concentration and actions of dopamine in the synapse (Fig. 1.4–2). Importantly, dopamine neurons in striatum and nucleus accumbens are equipped with a high density of DATs and so are especially susceptible to drugs that target this site. For example, blockade of dopamine re-uptake by cocaine in the nucleus accumbens, prolongs and intensifies dopamine’s actions in this region and is key to the euphoric effects of the drug. Similarly, amphetamine and methamphetamine amplify dopamine signaling in the nucleus accumbens by blocking dopamine reuptake and increasing release of dopamine. The VTA-nucleus accumbens pathway is part of the brain’s reward pathway stimulated by all types of reinforcing stimuli such as food, sex, and many drugs of abuse. While stimulants can be addictive, some (e.g., methylphenidate, amphetamine) are used at lower doses to treat ADHD, and probably achieve their beneficial effects by actions on the dopamine and norepinephrine transporters (NETs). Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse) is a long-acting oral prodrug that is hydrolyzed in the blood to active D- amphetamine, and it has been approved for treating ADHD. The DAT is also the pharmacological target for the parkinsonian neurotoxins, 6- hydroxydopamine and 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). In fact the toxicity of MPTP is dependent on the combined function of MAO-B, DAT, and VMAT-2. Once inside the brain, MPTP is metabolized by MAO-B to the actual toxic species, MPP+, which is a substrate for DAT. When inside the cytoplasm MPP+ acts as a mitochondrial poison, although its potency is restrained by VMAT2 which can sequester MPP+ inside vesicles away from mitochondria. The tuberoinfundibular, tuberohypophysial, olfactory bulb, mesoprefrontal, and mesoamygdala dopamine neurons appear to differ from the other dopamine systems described by the absence, or diminished expression, of DAT. 

========262========

FIGURE 1.4–2. Schematic model of a dopaminergic synapse with sites of drug action. Site 1: Tyrosine hydroxylase reaction blocked by the competitive inhibitor, α- methyltyrosine. Administration of L-dopa augments dopamine levels and is the mainstay treatment of Parkinson disease. Carbidopa is an inhibitor of AADC that does not cross the blood–brain barrier, and is used in conjunction with L-dopa in the treatment of Parkinson disease to reduce the peripheral side effects of L-dopa. Site 2: VMAT transports cytoplasmic DA into storage vesicles, decreasing its cytoplasmic concentration and preventing metabolism by monoamine oxidase. Reserpine inhibits VMAT and depletes dopamine stores. Tetrabenazine also interferes with the uptake–storage mechanism and has been used for treatment of hyperkinetic movement disorders. Sites 3 and 4: Once released, dopamine can interact with postsynaptic D1-like receptors (site 3) and D2-like receptors (site 4). Bromocriptine (Parlodel) and apomorphine (Apokyn) are D2 agonists used in the treatment of Parkinson disease. Pramipexole (Mirapex) is a D3 agonist used in the treatment of Parkinson disease and restless legs syndrome. Aripiprazole (Abilify) is a partial D2 agonist used as an antidepressant. All antipsychotic drugs block D2 receptors to some degree. Site 5: Interaction of dopamine with autoreceptors regulates synthesis and release of dopamine. Low doses of apomorphine have been used experimentally as an autoreceptor agonist. Site 6: The plasma membrane transporter recaptures synaptic dopamine. The drug of abuse, cocaine, inhibits the dopamine transporter, and amphetamine increases dopamine release via the transporter. Site 7: MAO present outside the presynaptic terminal can metabolize dopamine that has been released. Selegiline (Eldepryl) is an MAO-B inhibitor used in the treatment of Parkinson disease. Site 8: Dopamine is a substrate for COMT, an enzyme that is inhibited by tolcapone and entacapone, which are used in treatment of Parkinson disease. AADC, aromatic amino acid decarboxylase; AC, adenylate cyclase; cAMP, cyclic AMP; COMT, catechol-O- methyltransferase; D1–5, dopamine receptor subtypes; DOPAC, dihydroxyphenylacetic acid; G, G protein; HVA, homovanillic acid; MAO, monoamine oxidase; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter. (Modified from Nestler E, Hyman S, Holtzman D, Malenka R. 

========263========

Molecular Neuropharmacology, McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc; 2015.) 
Norepinephrine Plasma Membrane Transporter. The NET is located on all norepinephrine neurons and efficiently recaptures most of the transmitter that is released into the synapse (Fig. 1.4–3). In addition to the impact of the psychostimulants, such as cocaine and the amphetamines, on DAT, these drugs also interact with NET and intensify the synaptic actions of NE. The mechanism of certain antidepressant drugs includes blockade of NET, and these include the tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and the more specific serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) such as duloxetine (Cymbalta) and venlafaxine (Effexor), norepinephrine– dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs) such as bupropion (Wellbutrin), and the selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (NRIs), such as maprotiline and atomoxetine (Strattera), which is also used in the treatment of ADHD. 
FIGURE 1.4–3. Schematic model of a central norepinephrine synapse with sites of drug action. Site 1: Tyrosine is transported into the presynaptic terminal by an active uptake mechanism and converted to NE by a series of enzymatic steps. The competitive inhibitor, α-methyltyrosine blocks the tyrosine hydroxylase reaction. DBH reaction is prevented by disulfiram. Site 2: Norepinephrine is taken up from the cytoplasm and transported into storage vesicles by the VMAT-2. Reserpine inhibits VMAT and depletes norepinephrine stores; the drug was once widely prescribed for its antihypertensive actions. Tetrabenazine also interferes with the uptake–storage mechanism and has been used for treatment of 

========264========

hyperkinetic movement disorders. Sites 3, 4, and 5: After release, norepinephrine can interact with two categories of G-protein–coupled adrenergic receptors, α1 and α2 (sites 3 and 4) and β (site 5). The majority of adrenergic receptors are localized postsynaptically where they mediate the cellular responses of the postsynaptic neuron. Propranolol (Inderal) is an antagonist of β-adrenergic receptor, and is used to treat performance anxiety and hypertension. α1-Receptor (site 3) is inhibited prazosin (Minipress), used as an antihypertensive, but which also has anxiolytic effects used in the treatment PTSD. Site 6: α2-Autoreceptors localized in the nerve terminals modulate the synthesis and release of norepinephrine, while cell body and dendritic α2-autoreceptors modulate impulse flow. Low doses of clonidine (Catapres) and guanfacine (Intuniv) are agonists at these sites. α2- Agonists are used to treat opioid withdrawal, Tourette syndrome, and hypertension. Yohimbine is an antagonist at this receptor site. Site 7: The synaptic action of norepinephrine is terminated by reuptake into the presynaptic terminal by norepinephrine plasma membrane transporter. The tricyclic antidepressants, such as desipramine (Norpramin), are inhibitors of this uptake mechanism. Some newer antidepressants are more selective for NET, such as atomoxetine (Strattera), and by SNRIs such as duloxetine (Cymbalta). Site 8: Norepinephrine is metabolized by MAO and it is a preferential substrate for MAO-A. Inhibitors of MAO-A block metabolism of norepinephrine, and this action may contribute to their antidepressant property. Examples of irreversible nonselective inhibitors are isocarboxazid, phenelzine, and tranylcypromine. Moclobemide inhibits MAO-A reversibly. Site 9: Norepinephrine is also metabolized by COMT, which is inhibited by tolcapone (Tasmar) and entacapone (Comtan), drugs that are used in treatment of Parkinson disease. The combined actions of MAO and COMT produces MHPG, a major brain norepinephrine metabolite. α and β, subtypes of norepinephrine receptor; AADC, aromatic amino acid decarboxylase; AC, adenylate cyclase; cAMP, cyclic AMP; COMT, catechol-O- methyltransferase; DAG, diacylglycerol; DBH, dopamine β-hydroxylase; DHPG, 3,4- dihydroxyphenylglycol; G, G protein; IP3, inositol triphosphate; MAO, monoamine oxidase; MHPG, 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol; SNRI, serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter. (Modified from Nestler E, Hyman S, Holtzman D, Malenka R. Molecular Neuropharmacology, McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc; 2015.) 
Since the original studies on dopamine uptake, it has been known that dopamine is a good substrate for the NET. However, not until relatively recently has the importance of this been appreciated. In regions, such as striatum and nucleus accumbens, where dopamine neurons express a high density of DAT, there is a relatively sparse norepinephrine innervation, and dopamine uptake depends primarily on DAT. However, in regions such as the prefrontal cortex, in which dopamine neurons express low levels of DAT and there is a rich norepinephrine innervation, dopamine uptake depends strongly on NET. In fact, it has been suggested that dopamine can be co-released with norepinephrine by norepinephrine neurons, as a result of nonspecific uptake of dopamine by the NET and/or because dopamine is a precursor in the biosynthesis of norepinephrine. 
Epinephrine Plasma Membrane Transporter. There is no evidence for a specific transporter for epinephrine and no drug that selectively blocks epinephrine reuptake has been described. All of the pharmacological agents that block the NET selectively are also effective inhibitors of epinephrine uptake. Thus, it appears unlikely that a selective transporter for epinephrine exists. 

========265========

Metabolism. The major mammalian enzymes of importance in the metabolic degradation of catecholamines are MAO and catechol O- methyltransferase (COMT), and either of these enzymes can catalyze the first step in catecholamine metabolism. MAO converts its substrates to their corresponding aldehydes, and these aldehyde intermediates are rapidly metabolized either by the aldehyde dehydrogenase or aldehyde reductase. Thus, multiple metabolites of catecholamines are formed. In primate brain the major end metabolites for dopamine is homovanillic acid (HVA), whereas in rodent brain 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) and DOPAC sulfate predominate. For norepinephrine, 3-methoxy-4- hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) is the main end metabolite in primate brain, but in rodent brain both 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol (DHPG) and MHPG exist in high concentrations and both metabolites are mainly sulfate conjugated. In the periphery, the major metabolite of dopamine is HVA and for norepinephrine it is vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) with a significant proportion of both compounds being conjugated to either sulfate or to glucuronide. 
It is well documented that, in the animals, short-term fluctuations in the levels of dopamine metabolites, DOPAC and HVA, in the striatum, nucleus accumbens, and prefrontal cortex provide a useful index, respectively, of alterations in impulse flow in the nigrostriatal, mesolimbic, and mesocortical dopamine pathways. Changes in dopamine metabolite concentration in CSF have also been associated with alterations in central dopaminergic activity, or integrity of the central dopamine systems. Similarly alterations in the concentration of MPHG have been associated with changes in norepinephrine function. 
MAO. This enzyme is located on the outer membranes of mitochondria. Separate genes encode two isoforms of MAO (types A and B), which can be distinguished by substrate specificity and sensitivity to the selective inhibitors. In brain, MAO-A is preferentially located in dopaminergic and noradrenergic neurons, while MAO-B is the major form present in serotonergic neurons and glia. Dopamine and norepinephrine are effective substrates for both forms, whereas serotonin is a preferential substrate for MAO-A. The prototypical inhibitors of the two forms are clorgyline for MAO-A and selegiline (formerly known as deprenyl) for MAO-B. Selegiline (Eldepryl) or rasagiline (Azilect) are irreversible MAO-B inhibitors that are used in the treatment of Parkinson disease, usually in combination with L- dopa to prolong or enhance the effect of dopamine formed from L-dopa. 
COMT. There are two isoforms of COMT, a membrane-bound form and a soluble form. Membrane-bound COMT is the major form found in the CNS, has a higher affinity for catecholamines, and it is located principally in neurons. The soluble form has a lower affinity for catecholamines and is the major form expressed in the periphery, but is present also in CNS glia. Two COMT inhibitors, tolcapone and entacapone, 

========266========

are used as adjuncts to L-dopa and treatment in Parkinson disease to slow L-dopa metabolism and thereby prolong its effects and reduce L-dopa requirements. 
Accumulating evidence from clinical and preclinical studies shows that COMT plays a more significant role in dopamine metabolism in the prefrontal cortex than in other regions such as striatum. Another interesting facet to the role of COMT in frontal cortex is the finding that the COMT gene contains a polymorphism (Val158Met) that affects the in vivo activity of the enzyme. Met158 homozygotes have approximately one-third less COMT enzyme activity in prefrontal cortex than Val158 homozygotes. Consistent with its role in modulating prefrontal cortex dopamine levels, the Val158Met polymorphism is associated with performance on tests of working memory and executive function, which depend on prefrontal cortex function. Thus, in healthy volunteers the high-activity Val158 allele is linked with relatively poorer performance on such tasks, relative to the Met158 allele, presumably as a result of increased dopamine metabolism and lower synaptic dopamine levels. However, this relationship is not constant across patient populations and drug-treated individuals as an inverted “U”-shaped curve describes the relationship between dopaminergic transmission in prefrontal cortex and cognitive performance, with both suboptimal and supraoptimal dopamine activity impairing cognitive performance. The COMT polymorphism has been implicated in a number of neuropsychiatric phenotypes including evidence to support an association between COMT allele frequency and the genetic risk of schizophrenia. 
Dopamine Receptors 
The physiological actions of dopamine are mediated by five distinct but closely related GPCRs. On the basis of their structure, pharmacology, and primary effector mechanisms, they are grouped as D1-like (D1 and D5) and D2-like (D2, D3, D4) dopamine receptors (Fig. 1.4–2). The D1-like dopamine receptors activate the Gs family of G proteins, increase adenylate cyclase activity and are found postsynaptically on dopamine-receptive cell. The D2- like dopamine receptors (D2, D3, and D4) couple to the Gi family, inhibit adenylate cyclase activity, and are expressed both postsynaptically on dopamine-receptive cells and presynaptically on dopaminergic neurons. 
In brain D1 dopamine receptors are expressed in particularly high density in the nigrostriatal, mesolimbic, and mesocortical dopamine systems, such as the striatum, nucleus accumbens, and frontal cortex. In contrast, D2 receptors are more evenly distributed in brain, with the highest levels in striatum and nucleus accumbens. Dopamine transmission through D1 and D2 receptors in striatum and prefrontal cortex plays an essential role in many aspects of motor control, reward systems, and 

========267========

cognition. The alternative splicing of the D2 gene results in generation of two major variants, termed D2S (D2-short) and D2L (D2-long). There is some evidence that D2S is mostly expressed presynaptically and is involved in autoreceptor functions, with D2L being predominantly a postsynaptic isoform. The D3 dopamine receptor has a more limited pattern of distribution, with the highest level of expression being observed in the limbic areas, such as in the shell subdivision of the nucleus accumbens. Some data suggest that D3 receptors can operate as autoreceptors, to complement the D2 autoreceptor role in regulating the neuronal firing rate, synthesis, and release of dopamine. Among the dopamine receptors, the D4 subtype has the lowest level of expression in the brain, with documented expression in frontal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. D5 dopamine receptors are expressed at low levels in multiple brain regions, including frontal cortex, hypothalamus, and hippocampus. D1, D2, and D4 dopamine receptors have also been observed in the retina. High expression of D2 dopamine receptors also occurs in the pituitary gland. In the periphery, all subtypes of dopamine receptors have been observed in varying proportions in the kidney, adrenal glands, sympathetic ganglia, gastrointestinal tract, blood vessels, and heart. 
Some of the older, so-called “typical,” antipsychotic drugs, such as chlorpromazine, block both D1 and D2 receptors, while others like haloperidol, are selective for D2 receptors. All “atypical” antipsychotics effectively block D2 dopamine receptors with little or no impact on D1 receptors. As the full beneficial effects of antipsychotic drugs can take weeks to develop, it is apparent that the mechanism involved is more than just blockade of the D2 receptor site. In addition, all antipsychotic drugs have appreciable affinities for non-DA receptors, and atypical antipsychotic drugs tend to have substantial potency at serotonin receptors, although it is not clear to what extent the interaction with serotonin receptors improves the antipsychotic effect or reduces some of the unwanted effects of dopamine receptor blockade. Typical antipsychotic drugs are prone to induce extrapyramidal side effects, which include parkinsonism, dystonia, and choreiform movements (tardive dyskinesia). An additional side effect is elevated serum prolactin, resulting from a disturbance of dopamine- mediated regulation of prolactin secretion. The consequences of hyperprolactinemia include menstrual disturbances, galactorrhea, sexual dysfunction, gynecomastia, infertility, decreased bone mineral density, and possibly breast cancer. Atypical antipsychotics with especially high affinity for D2 receptors, such as risperidone (Risperdal), are more prone to induce hyperprolactinemia, whereas this side effect is rare with those drugs that bind to D2 less avidly, such as aripiprazole (Abilify), clozapine (Clozaril), 

========268========

olanzapine (Zyprexa), quetiapine (Seroquel), and ziprasidone (Geodon). Although clozapine was discovered in the 1960s, it still has an important role in combatting treatment-resistant schizophrenia with low likelihood of extrapyramidal side effects. However, approximately 1 percent of patients treated with clozapine develop serious agranulocytosis, while it also shares the frequent side effects of other antipsychotic drugs such as weight gain. The success of clozapine was initially linked to its antagonism of D4 receptors, which distinguishes it from other antipsychotic drugs. However, current thinking is that clozapine’s combined actions at several receptors may be responsible for its therapeutic properties. Of the newer antipsychotic drugs, olanzapine has the closest receptor profile to clozapine. Atypical antipsychotic drugs, including clozapine, are generally superior to typical neuroleptics with regard to treating negative symptoms and cognitive dysfunction associated with schizophrenia. 
D2-like agonists have an important use in the symptomatic treatment of Parkinson disease. Such drugs include apomorphine, a D2 agonist, and also pramipexole (Mirapex) and ropinirole (Requip), which are D2-like agonists with greatest affinity for the D3 receptor. Nonselective dopamine agonists (e.g., rotigotine) have also been used in Parkinson disease, in addition to restless legs syndrome. D2 autoreceptors are generally activated by a lower concentration of dopamine agonists than necessary to activate postsynaptic D2 receptors, so it possible in experimental models to demonstrate that the same dopamine agonist induces a biphasic effect depending on its dose. However, no drugs are used clinically to preferentially target D2 autoreceptors. 
Historically, GPCRs are believed to function as monomeric units; however, it now apparent in some instances dopamine receptors may directly interact with members of the same receptor family and with structurally divergent families of receptors to form heteromers with unique functional and pharmacological properties, although this knowledge has yet to lead to novel pharmacological agents. 
Adrenergic Receptors 
For many years, receptors for norepinephrine and epinephrine (adrenergic receptors) were divided into just three distinct classes, α1, α2, and β. A postsynaptic location is typical for α1- and β-receptors, whereas α2- receptors exist both pre- and postsynaptically. Currently, three α1 subtypes (α1a, α1b, α1d), four α2-receptor subtypes (α2A–D), and three β-receptor subtypes (β1–3) are recognized (Fig. 1.4–3). All β-receptor are Gs-coupled, whereas most α1-receptors are Gq-​coupled and α2-receptors are typically Gi-coupled. 
As norepinephrine is the transmitter used by most postganglionic 

========269========

neurons of the ANS, agonists and antagonists at various adrenergic receptors exert profound effects on the functioning of many peripheral organs by mimicking or blocking respectively the sympathetic innervation. Agonists are referred to as “sympathomimetics” and antagonist as “sympatholytics.” In brain, the locus coeruleus noradrenergic system exerts a widespread influence on neuronal circuits that are essential substrates of arousal and cognition and several cognitive and affective disorders have been posited to involve a dysregulation of noradrenergic neurotransmission. In addition, by sending direct projections to the sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord and parasympathetic preganglionic neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord, the noradrenergic locus coeruleus plays central role regulating autonomic activity. 
The predominant peripheral effect of α1-adrenergic agonists is the constriction of arterial smooth muscle, which in turn causes an increase in blood pressure, and drugs such as phenylephrine and methoxamine are used occasionally in the clinic to increase blood pressure during a hypotensive crisis. α1-Adrenergic agonists are also widely used as nasal decongestants, and their decongestant activity is mediated by constriction of blood flow to nasal mucosa and by a reduction in airway secretions. Antagonists of α1-adrenergic receptors inhibit smooth muscle contraction and reduce arteriolar resistance by dilating arteries. Their major uses are as an adjuvant treatment for hypertension and for treating symptomatic benign prostatic hypertrophy. α1-Antagonists such as prazosin (Minipress) have also been shown to be useful in treating some of the symptoms of PTSD. 
α2-Adrenergic agonists, like clonidine (Catapres) and guanfacine (Intuniv) have been used to treat hypertension and the mechanism appears to be a reduction in sympathetic tone elicited by activation of α2-receptors in the anterior hypothalamus. α2-Adrenergic agonists also have a role in the treatment of certain CNS disorders, especially those involving prefrontal cortex dysfunction. Damage to the catecholaminergic innervation of the prefrontal cortex impairs performance in tests of executive function, and although dopamine has a prominent role in mediating the effects of these lesions, substantial evidence indicates that norepinephrine also exerts a potent modulatory influence on prefrontal cortex functions. Early pharmacological studies on the role of α2-receptors in prefrontal cortex function focused on clonidine, although clonidine produces mixed effects, presumably due to competing pre- versus postsynaptic effects and limitations from sedative and hypotensive side effects. A superior profile has been observed with the more selective α2A- agonist, guanfacine, which has been shown to improve working memory in animals and in some human populations, possibly by binding to 

========270========

postsynaptic α2A-receptors and increasing noradrenergic tone. Guanfacine is now being used to treat a variety of disorders with prominent prefrontal cortex dysfunction, including Tourette syndrome and ADHD. Clonidine is also used to manage the acute phase of opioid withdrawal, an effect achieved by normalizing the hyperactivity of noradrenergic locus coeruleus neurons. The α2-antagonist, yohimbine, which increases activity of locus coeruleus noradrenergic activity by blocking autoreceptors, can induce symptoms of fear and anxiety in animals and humans. 
These adrenergic agonists are used in the treatment of certain cases of hypertension. 
β-Adrenergic agonists have profound effects on the cardiac and pulmonary systems and are one of the primary agents used to treat asthma and other chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases. Antagonists of β- adrenergic receptors are mainstays in the treatment of ischemic heart disease and hypertension. β-Adrenergic antagonists, such as propranolol, are also used to reduce signs of increased sympathetic activity in individuals with social anxiety (stage fright), such as hand tremor, sweating, and rapid heartbeat. 
SEROTONIN 
Anatomy and Functions 
Mammals employ serotonin as a neurotransmitter within both the central and PNS. Serotonin is also found in many cells that are not neurons, such as platelets, mast cells, and the enterochromaffin cells. More than 80 percent of the serotonin found in the body is found in the gastrointestinal system where it modulates motility and digestive functions. In brain only one in a million neurons produces serotonin, yet this evolutionary ancient signaling molecule influences virtually all aspects of CNS function due to the extensive innervation pattern of the neurons. Due to this widespread distribution in brain, serotonin has been implicated in a vast array of physiological and pathological processes. 
The cell bodies of serotonergic neurons are clustered in multiple midline raphe nuclei of the brainstem. The caudal raphe nuclei send descending projections into the medulla, cerebellum, and spinal cord, which are involved in motor activity, pain control, and regulation of autonomic processes. The more rostral located dorsal and median raphe nuclei send ascending axonal projections to the rest of the brain. The median raphe provides most of the serotonergic fibers that innervate the limbic system, while the dorsal raphe nucleus provides most of the serotonergic fibers that innervate the cerebral cortex, thalamus, and striatum, in addition to the dopaminergic neurons residing in the substantia nigra and VTA. These rostral serotonergic systems have a modulatory role in many functions including mood, anxiety, aggression, 

========271========

cognition, feeding, the sleep–wake cycle, and sexual behavior. The link between serotonin and depression is particularly compelling, and the clinical efficacy of antidepressant drugs is strongly associated with an enhancement of serotonergic function. 
Interestingly, the projections from the dorsal and median raphe can be distinguished morphologically. Dorsal raphe serotonergic fibers are very fine, with small vesicle-coated swellings called varicosities that are fusiform or granular in appearance, while median raphe fibers are thicker with large spherical or beaded varicosities. The two systems coexist in most areas of the brain, although the ratio varies considerably. The striatum, thalamus, and dopaminergic cell bodies in the midbrain receive innervation predominantly by the neurons originating in the dorsal raphe, while the hippocampus, septum, and hypothalamus receive a particularly high proportion of fibers arising in the median raphe. In cerebral cortex, there is extensive overlap between dorsal and median raphe projections. The two types of fibers exhibit differential sensitivity to the neurotoxic effects of the amphetamine analog 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA, “ecstasy”), which causes long-lasting or permanent damage to the fine axons of the dorsal raphe while sparing the thick beaded axons of the median raphe. 
Life Cycle 
Synthesis. In brain the first step in serotonin synthesis is active uptake of the dietary amino acid tryptophan across the BBB and then into neurons (Fig. 1.4–4). Brain tryptophan is utilized in all brain cells for protein synthesis, in addition to serving as a substrate for transmitter synthesis in serotonin neurons. The carrier processes that transport tryptophan from plasma into brain and from extracellular fluid into neurons is open to competition from LNAAs, including other aromatic amino acids (e.g., tyrosine and phenylalanine), branched-chain amino acids (e.g., leucine, isoleucine, and valine), and others (e.g., methionine and histidine). The competitive nature of the LNAA carrier means that brain levels of tryptophan will be determined not only by the plasma concentration of tryptophan but also by the plasma concentration of competing neutral amino acids. The rate limiting enzyme for the synthesis of serotonin in brain, tryptophan hydroxylase, is not saturated under normal physiological conditions. Therefore, any decrease or increase in brain tryptophan levels results in a reduction or a stimulation of serotonin synthesis, respectively. Thus, dietary protein and carbohydrate content can specifically influence brain tryptophan and serotonin levels by effects on plasma amino acid patterns. Because plasma tryptophan has a daily rhythmic variation in its concentration, this concentration variation can also influence the rate and synthesis of brain serotonin. However, it is unclear to what extent presynaptic and postsynaptic homeostatic mechanisms prevent 

========272========

tryptophan-induced alterations in serotonin translated into changes in neurotransmission. 
synthesis 
from 
being 
FIGURE 1.4–4. 
Biosynthesis 
of 
serotonin 
and 
melatonin. 
Serotonin 
(5- 

========273========

hydroxytryyptamine, 5HT) and melatonin are produced by a multistep synthesis that starts with the dietary amino acid, tryptophan. Cells in the pineal gland are the major site of melatonin synthesis, and they contain the enzymes AANAT and ASMT that are necessary to convert serotonin to melatonin. AADC, aromatic amino acid decarboxylase; AANAT, aralkylamine N-acetyltransferase (also known as serotonin acetylase); ASMT, acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase (also known as hydroxyindole O-methyltransferase); TPH, tryptophan hydroxylase. 
Tryptophan hydroxylase catalyzes the formation of 5- hydroxytryptophan from tryptophan, and this step in the synthesis of serotonin can be specifically blocked by p-chlorophenylalanine, which competes directly with tryptophan and binds irreversibly to the enzyme. Once synthesized from tryptophan, 5-hydroxytryptophan is almost immediately decarboxylated to yield serotonin. The enzyme responsible for this conversion is AADC, and is identical to the enzyme that decarboxylates L-dopa in dopamine and norepinephrine neurons. AADC is widespread in distribution; it is found in the peripheral and CNS associated with catecholamine- and serotonin-containing neurons and in the adrenal and pineal glands. It is also found in the kidney, liver, and various other tissues in which little or no monoamine transmitter is normally produced. It is possible to increase serotonin formation experimentally by administering 5-hydroxytryptophan and bypassing the rate-limiting tryptophan hydroxylase step. Thus, unlike tryptophan administration, which can result in a selective increase in serotonin in serotonin-containing neurons, 5- hydroxytryptophan administration will result in the nonspecific formation of serotonin at all sites containing AADC, including the catecholamine- containing neurons. 
In the pineal gland, serotonin can be further metabolized by acetylation and O-methylation to form melatonin. Melatonin has a major role in regulation of cyclic bodily activities. The SCN of the anterior hypothalamus is the master clock controlling circadian rhythms in mammals and it controls melatonin secretion from the pineal by an indirect pathway in response to the environmental light/dark cycle. Peak melatonin secretion occurs during darkness. Melatonin signals both the time of the day (“clock” function) and season of the year (“calendar” function) to many tissues of the body. Melatonin is available for over-the counter use as a hypnotic agent to induce sleep, but has limited effectiveness in healthy subjects at night when endogenous production of melatonin is high. Administration of melatonin may be of use to treat jet lag or to help shift-workers adjust to new work hours. Melatonin agonists have been developed and recently marketed, such as ramelteon (Rozerem). 
Transporters. After synthesis of serotonin in the cytoplasm, it is actively sequestered and concentrated in synaptic vesicles to await release (Fig. 1.4–5). Uptake of serotonin into vesicles is accomplished by VMAT-2 in brain, and is inhibited by drugs such as reserpine and tetrabenazine. 

========274========

Once released into the synapse, serotonin can interact with presynaptic and postsynaptic serotonin receptors. The synaptic effects of serotonin are limited by reuptake into the presynaptic terminal and by enzymatic conversion of serotonin to inactive metabolites. Reuptake serves as the major mechanism for the termination of the action of synaptic serotonin. The primary targets for the TCAs, such as amitriptyline (Elavil), clomipramine (Anafranil), desipramine (Norpramin), imipramine (Tofranil), and nortriptyline (Pamelor) is blockade of serotonin and NETs, which prolongs the action of the transmitters in the synapse, although this class of drug possesses several other pharmacological actions. Newer SSRIs are now the most widely prescribed antidepressants and antianxiety medications, such as citalopram (Celexa), fluoxetine (Prozac), fluvoxamine (Luvox), sertraline (Zoloft), and paroxetine (Paxil). More recently, SNRIs, such as duloxetine (Cymbalta) and venlafaxine (Effexor) have been introduced for treatment of depression disorders. SSRIs are also acknowledged as the first-line pharmacological treatment of choice for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). A polymorphism occurs in the promoter region of the serotonin transporter gene that affects its expression, and this finding provoked considerable controversy over the possible functional consequences of a particular variant (5-HTTLPR). It now appears that there is a small but real effect of this polymorphism on antidepressant response and on depressive symptoms following adverse life events. 
Psychomotor stimulants like amphetamine enter monoamine nerve terminals by their transporters (DAT, NET, and SERT) and stimulate release of all three monoamines into the synapse by rapid reverse transport. Halogenated amphetamine derivatives (e.g., fenfluramine) are selective for SERT compared with DAT and NET. There is some evidence that the appetite suppressing action of fenfluramine is mediated by release of serotonin and activation of 5HT2C receptors in the medial hypothalamus. Fenfluramine alone or in combination with phentermine (called “fen- phen”) was formerly prescribed as an appetite suppressant. However, fenfluramine was withdrawn from the market when it was found to be associated with a high incidence of pulmonary hypertension and valvular heart disease. This toxic effect is believed to be related either to the peripheral release of serotonin from platelets or more likely as a result of activation of cardiac 5HT2B receptors by norfenfluramine, the main metabolite of fenfluramine. 
Metabolism. Serotonin is enzymatically degraded by MAO, and the product of this reaction, 5-hydroxyindoleacetaldehyde, is oxidized to 5- hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA). Although serotonin is deaminated more effectively by MAO-A compared to MAO-B, it is actually the B-form that is located inside serotonergic neurons. Some research has shown that 

========275========

people with a particular loss-of-function variant of the MAO-A gene are predisposed to violence and other antisocial behaviors, but this research is quite controversial. Inhibitors of MAO were the first drugs to be marketed as antidepressants, and the first generation of monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) were not selective for the A or B isoforms and inhibited the enzyme irreversibly, such as tranylcypromine (Parnate) and phenelzine (Nardil). However, the propensity of tyramine-rich foods (such as cheese) to provoke dangerous hypertensive reactions in patients taking these MAOIs was soon recognized and forced their use to be severely curtailed. As the intestinal mucosa contains predominantly MAO-A, it is an important site for metabolizing ingested MAO substrates like tyramine. When intestinal MAO-A is inhibited, dangerous amounts of tyramine can enter the circulation and release norepinephrine from sympathetic neurons and epinephrine from adrenal medulla, leading to a pressor response. Selective MAO-B inhibitors were shown to be safer with regard to this “cheese reaction,” but unfortunately lacked antidepressant efficacy. Nevertheless, the selective MAO-B inhibitor, selegiline is marketed as an antidepressant, but has to be used at high enough doses to inhibit MAO-A. The delivery of selegiline transdermally (Emsam) is designed to reduce the risk of tyramine-provoked reactions by minimizing inhibition of gastrointestinal and hepatic MAO-A activity, while allowing inhibition of central MAO-A and MAO-B. Reversible inhibitors of MAO-A (RIMA) (e.g., moclobemide) are efficacious in depressive disorders and appear relatively safe with respect to tyramine sensitivity. 
Receptors 
Seven distinct families of 5HT receptors have been identified (5HT1 to 5HT7), and subpopulations have been described for several of these (Fig. 1.4–5). All of them except the ionotropic 5HT3 receptor are G protein coupled. For serotonin GPCRs, three main types of primary coupling to G proteins have been described. The 5HT1A receptors activate Gi/Go proteins, the 5HT2A receptors activate Gq/11, and the 5HT4, 5HT6, and 5HT7 activate Gs receptors. 
5HT1 Receptors. 5HT1 family comprises five different gene products: 5HT1A, 5HT1B, 5HT1D, 5HT1E, and 5HT1F receptors. The 5HT1A receptor is the most widely distributed of all 5HT receptors, and they are expressed on the soma and dendrites of all serotonin neurons where they serve as autoreceptors to regulate cell excitability, and the synthesis and release of 5HT. 5HT1A receptors are also located postsynaptically and on astrocytes and other glia. Partial 5HT1A agonists, such as buspirone (Buspar), are clinically useful anxiolytic drugs. 

========276========

FIGURE 1.4–5.Schematicmodelofaserotoninsynapsewithsitesofdrugaction.Site1: Tryptophan is taken up into the neuron by an active transport mechanism and converted to 5-OH-tryptophan by the rate-limiting enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase; this enzyme can be effectively inhibited by p-chlorophenylalanine. AADC converts 5-OH-tryptophan to serotonin. Site 2: Serotonin is taken up and stored in vesicles by VMAT-2. Reserpine and tetrabenazine interfere with the uptake-storage mechanism of the amine granules, causing a marked depletion of serotonin. Sites 3, 4, and 5: Once released, serotonin can interact with as many as 14 different receptors. A number of G-protein–coupled serotonin receptors are located postsynaptically. Lurasidone (Latuda), a novel antipsychotic drug with possible procognitive properties, has high affinity for the 5HT7 receptor (site 3). The anxiolytics, buspirone (Buspar) and gepirone (Ariza), are 5HT1A receptors (site 4). Many antipsychotic drugs inhibit 5HT2A receptors (site 5). The hallucinogenic effects of drugs such as LSD, mescaline, and psilocybin are mediated by agonist interactions at the 5HT2A receptor. Site 6: In contrast to the other serotonin receptors, the 5HT3 receptor is a ligand- gated ion channel. Ondansetron is a 5HT3 antagonist that is an effective antiemetic and lacks parkinsonian side effects inherent in D2 antagonists like metoclopramide (Reglan) or prochlorperazine (Compazine). Site 7: Serotonin autoreceptors (5-HT1B rodent and 5-HT1D human) modulate the stimulus-induced release of serotonin and are located on the presynaptic terminals. 5HT1A autoreceptors are located on the serotonin cell bodies and dendrites where they modulate impulse flow. Anti-migraine triptan drugs, such as sumatriptan (Imitrex), are 5HT1D/1B agonists. Site 8: Termination of the synaptic actions of serotonin is accomplished by its reuptake into the neuron by the serotonin transporter. SSRIs and SNRIs are classes of antidepressant that inhibit the serotonin transporter and increase the synaptic actions of serotonin. The halogenated amphetamine, fenfluramine, causes release of serotonin by rapid reverse transport. Site 9: Synaptic actions of serotonin are also attenuated by its metabolism. Inhibitors of MAO-A block metabolism of serotonin and are used as antidepressants. Examples of irreversible inhibitors are isocarboxazid (Marplan), phenelzine (Nardil), and tranylcypromine (Parnate), whereas moclobemide inhibits MAO-A reversibly. 5HIAA, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid; 5HT1–7, subtypes of 

========277========

serotonin receptor; 5-OH-tryptophan, 5-hydroxytryptophan; AADC, aromatic amino acid decarboxylase; AC, adenylate cyclase; cAMP, cyclic AMP; DAG, diacylglycerol; G, G protein; IP3, inositol triphosphate; MAO, monoamine oxidase; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter. (Modified from Nestler E, Hyman S, Holtzman D, Malenka R. Molecular Neuropharmacology, McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc; 2015.) 
5HT1B and 5HT1D receptors resemble each other in structure and distribution. They are predominantly located on the presynaptic terminals of serotonin neurons where they function as autoreceptors to control local synthesis and release of 5HT. 5HT1B receptors are also present on axon terminals of nonserotonergic neurons where they act as heteroreceptors to control the presynaptic function of other transmitters. The serotonergic system has long been linked to migraine and 5HT1B/D agonists, such as sumatriptan (Imitrex) and other triptan drugs are effective treatments for these types of headaches. The mechanism is not clear however, and may be due either to vasoconstriction induced by activation of 5HT1B and 5HT1D receptors on cranial blood vessels or to modulation of activity in trigeminal afferents that carry pain information from the meninges. 
5HT1E is a highly expressed receptor in human brain, and is particularly enriched in hippocampus, making it a possible drug target for memory disorders, such as Alzheimer disease or temporal lobe epilepsy. Interestingly, this receptor subtype is absent in rats and mice. Research into the functions of the 5HT1E receptor has been hampered by the lack of selective pharmacological tools and specific antibodies. 
Expression of 5HT1F has been reported in various brain regions, in addition to the trigeminal ganglia, and cerebral blood vessels. Triptans, which are used to treat migraine, have appreciable affinity for 5HT1F receptors, and the development of 5HT1F agonists may provide promising new treatments for migraine. 
Although there was originally a receptor designated as 5HT1C, it has been reclassified as 5HT2C receptor due to its high sequence homology with other members of the 5HT2 subclass. 
5HT2 Receptors. The 5HT2 family has three members, 5HT2A, 5HT2B, and 5HT2C, which share similarities in amino acid sequence and signaling properties. They all are coupled to phospholipase C (PLC) by Gq/11. 
5HT2A is expressed widely throughout the brain, with especially high abundance in the cortex, where it is present in both interneurons and pyramidal neurons. The disturbance in sensory perception induced by hallucinogenic (psychedelic) drugs (e.g., D-lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD], mescaline, psilocybin, and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine), is mediated by full or partial agonism at the 5HT2A receptor. Second- 

========278========

generation antipsychotic drugs are characterized by their relatively higher potency as antagonists at the 5HT2A site compared to D2 receptors. There is some evidence that downregulation 5HT2A receptor and/or 5HT2C receptors may be an adaptive mechanism contributing to the antidepressant effect of SSRIs, and in fact blockade of 5HT2A or 5HT2C receptors enhances antidepressant-like effects of SSRIs in animal models. In agreement with this hypothesis is evidence of the effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs given with SSRIs in treatment-resistant depression. One useful effect of 5HT2A receptor activation is a reduction in intraocular pressure, and this has led to the development of compounds that reduce pressure inside the eyes, but without crossing the BBB and producing hallucinogenic side effects. 
5HT2B receptors have a restricted expression in the CNS, which contrast with their abundance in the periphery. Research on 5HT2B has been limited due to the cardiotoxicity of 5HT2B agonists, yet recent evidence in animal models suggest that 5HT2B receptors positively modulates serotonergic activity may be required for the therapeutic actions of SSRIs. Consequently, the 5HT2B receptor may become a new target in antidepressant treatments. 
5HT2C receptor has a widespread and heterogeneous distribution in brain. 5HT2C receptors have been implicated in the mechanism underlying weight gain resulting from chronic administration of antipsychotic drugs, as those with the potential to produce weight gain, such as clozapine (Clozaril) and olanzapine (Zyprexa), have greater affinity for the 5HT2C, compared with 5HT2A receptor. Antipsychotic drugs that are more selective antagonists at the 5HT2A subtype have less liability for weight gain. Agonists at the 5HT2C receptor are being investigated as anti-obesity agents. Interestingly, 5HT2C in humans is located at the X chromosome, whereas all other 5HT receptors are autosomal. Thus, it is possible that polymorphisms at this receptor would affect the two sexes to a differing extent. 5HT2C polymorphism appears to determine levels of circulating leptin, providing a potential mechanism underlying the genetic association of the 5HT2C receptor with weight gain. 
5HT2C receptors are closely linked with the midbrain dopamine neurons, being able to regulate dopamine release in its terminal regions. For example, the firing rate of VTA dopamine neurons is inhibited or increased by 5HT2C agonists or antagonists, respectively, such that 5HT2C receptors regulate the release of dopamine in nucleus accumbens. The basis for this interaction is the location of 5HT2C receptors in the VTA on both dopamine and GABA neurons that innervate the nucleus accumbens. Because of the involvement of 5HT2C receptors with the VTA-nucleus accumbens pathway, specific ligands for this receptor subtype are under 

========279========

development for the treatment of schizophrenia and substance abuse disorders. 
5HT3 Receptors. As mentioned above, 5HT3 receptor is ligand-gated ion channel, so that it differs markedly in structure and mechanism from the other 5HT receptor subtypes. 5HT3 receptors are located in many brain areas, with highest densities in the medulla and spinal cord. Some 5HT3 receptors can be located postsynaptically, but in many regions they also are frequently expressed presynaptically where their activation modulates the release of a variety of neurotransmitters. 5HT3 antagonists, such as ondansetron (Zofran), granisetron (Kytril), dolasetron (Anzemet), and palonosetron (Aloxi) are used clinically in the treatment of emesis associated with cancer chemotherapy and radiotherapy and to combat symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. Owing to the unfavorable effects of 5HT3 agonists (e.g., nausea and anxiety) no clinical use of these is likely in the near future. In the periphery, 5HT3 receptors are prominently expressed in a variety of peripheral ganglia, and they have been proposed to modulate nociception and pain responses, as well as enteric and cardiovascular reflexes. 
5HT4 Receptors. These receptors are present in brain and periphery. The 5HT4 agonist cisapride (Propulsid) is in clinical use as a gastroprokinetic agent to increase motility in the upper GI tract. 
5HT5 and 5HT6 Receptors. Although 5HT5 receptors have been detected in brain, so far no drugs with selectivity for this subtypes is used clinically. The 5HT6 receptor is expressed almost exclusively in the brain, and its abundance in limbic and cortical regions has stimulated considerable research interest. There is recent evidence that an antagonist of 5HT6 receptors (Idalopirdine) may improve cognitive performance in patients with Alzheimer disease. Although the mechanism is not clear, the beneficial effect is thought to result from enhancements of cholinergic, glutamatergic, noradrenergic, and dopaminergic neurotransmission. 
5HT7 Receptors. The 5HT7 receptor, the most recently discovered member of the 5HT receptor family, has been identified in many brain regions, in addition to its presence in the periphery. There is some evidence for existence of both presynaptic and postsynaptic 5HT7 receptors. The function of this receptor has been most firmly linked with control of circadian rhythm and thermoregulation. However, a major recent interest in 5HT7 receptors derives from their possible relevant role in cognitive processes and the presence of 5HT7 receptor in hippocampus and 

========280========

prefrontal cortex supports this. Furthermore, it is relevant that several antipsychotics and antidepressants have high affinity for the 5HT7 receptor, which may contribute to their beneficial effects. 5HTR7 has also been implicated in the modulation of structural plasticity in adolescent and mature brain circuits. Lurasidone (Latuda) is an atypical antipsychotic drug that is a particularly potent 5HT7 antagonist and is used to treat schizophrenia and depressive episodes associated with bipolar 1 disorder. Studies have even indicated that lurasidone can have procognitive properties in normal monkeys. 
ACETYLCHOLINE 
Anatomy and Function 
In brain the axonal processes of cholinergic neurons either project to distant targets or contact cells locally within the same region (interneurons). Widely projecting cholinergic neurons originate from several clusters of cells within the basal forebrain complex and mesopontine complex in the upper brainstem. The basal forebrain population of cholinergic neurons comprises locations in medial septal nucleus, the diagonal band and the nucleus basalis of Meynert, and these neurons provide the vast majority of the cholinergic innervation to the telencephalon. Within the mesopontine complex, cholinergic neurons are located in pedunculopontine nucleus and in the LDT nucleus, and innervate the thalamus, and midbrain regions (including the substantia nigra and VTA), in addition to descending innervations to regions such as the locus coeruleus and dorsal raphe. While long projecting cholinergic neurons do innervate the striatum, the principal source of striatal acetylcholine is the cholinergic interneuron, which comprises only about 1 to 2 percent of all striatal cells, yet sends dense arbors of projections throughout the striatum. As would be predicted from their widespread distribution in brain, central cholinergic neurons are involved in a wide variety of processes such as cognition, learning and memory, arousal, motor control, and CBF. In Alzheimer disease there is significant degeneration of neurons in the nucleus basalis, leading to substantial reduction in cortical cholinergic innervation. The extent of neuronal loss correlates with degree of dementia, and the cholinergic deficit may contribute to the cognitive decline in this disease, consistent with the beneficial effects of drugs that promote acetylcholine signaling in this disorder. 
In the autonomic nervous system (ANS), acetylcholine is responsible for preganglionic transmission for both parasympathetic and sympathetic neurons and also at postganglionic synapses for the parasympathetic system. However, there are exceptions to this organization, such as the sympathetic innervation of adrenal glands and sweat glands that is 

========281========

provided by acetylcholine. 
Life Cycle 
The intraneuronal synthesis of acetylcholine involves only a single-step reaction (Fig. 1.4–6). The substrate choline is transported into cholinergic neurons by both high-affinity and low-affinity mechanisms, and acetylcholine is formed when the enzyme choline acetyltransferase catalyzes the transfer of an acetyl group from cytoplasmic acetyl coenzyme A to choline. The rate-limiting step in acetylcholine synthesis is the high affinity uptake of choline and while it is not clear how this is regulated, it is known that increased neuronal activity enhances choline entry into neurons. Once synthesized, acetylcholine is taken up into vesicles by the vesicular cholinergic transporter, a process that can be inhibited by vesamicol. 
FIGURE 1.4–6. Schematic model of an acetylcholine synapse with sites of drug action. Site 1: Choline is transported into the presynaptic terminal by an active uptake mechanism and converted to acetylcholine by a single enzymatic step. Acetyl coenzyme A required for acetylcholine synthesis is provided by presynaptic mitochondria. Site 2: Acetylcholine is taken up and stored inside vesicles. The vesicular transporter in cholinergic neurons is distinct from VMAT-2 present in other biogenic amine neurons and is blocked by vesamicol. Site 3: Release is promoted by black widow spider venom and blocked by botulinum toxin (peripheral synapse) and tetanus toxin (central synapse). Sites 4 and 5: After release, 

========282========

acetylcholine may interact with both G-protein–coupled muscarinic receptors (sites 4 and 5) on the postsynaptic cell. There are no muscarinic receptor subtype selective drugs, although some agents with partial selectivity are used experimentally. A clinically relevant nonselective muscarinic agonist is carbachol (Miostat), which is used in ophthalmological procedures. A typical antagonist is atropine, which is also in ophthalmology and to reduce salivary secretions during surgery. A subtype of nicotinic receptors is activated by varenicline, which is used to treat nicotine dependence. Nicotinic receptors are blocked by the pharmacological tools, α-bungarotoxin and hexamethonium. Site 6: Acetylcholine released from presynaptic terminals may also bind to nicotinic ligand-gated ion channels. A subtype of nicotinic receptors is activated by varenicline (Chantix), which is used to treat nicotine dependence. Nicotinic receptors are blocked by the pharmacological tools, α- bungarotoxin and hexamethonium. Site 7: Acetylcholine interacts with presynaptic muscarinic receptors to modulate subsequent release of transmitter. Site 8: In contrast to monoamine synapses, the plasma membrane transporter at a cholinergic synapse does not return the neurotransmitter to the presynaptic terminal but rather recycles precursor choline liberated after metabolism of acetylcholine. Hemicholinium-3 is a drug used to block choline transport experimentally. Site 9: Acetylcholine is metabolized by AChE, which present on both pre- and postsynaptic membranes, and serves to terminate its action. Examples of AChE inhibitors are physostigmine, which is used in eye drops to treat glaucoma, and donepezil (Aricept), which improves symptoms of Alzheimer disease. AChE, acetylcholinesterase; cAMP, cyclic AMP; DAG, diacylglycerol; G, G protein; IP3, inositol triphosphate; M1–5, subtypes of muscarinic receptor; MAO, monoamine oxidase; nAChR, nicotinic acetylcholine receptor; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter. (Modified from Nestler E, Hyman S, Holtzman D, Malenka R. Molecular Neuropharmacology, McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc; 2015.) 
Several potent toxins affect release of acetylcholine from vesicles into the synapse. Botulinum toxin A and tetanus toxin are derived from bacteria and prevent release of acetylcholine resulting in paralysis. However, if it is injected in small amounts, botulinum toxin can weaken a muscle locally and this effect has been utilized in the treatment of spasms and dystonias, in addition as a cosmetic application in smoothing of facial wrinkles. Once released from the presynaptic neuron into the synapse, acetylcholine is not recaptured by an uptake mechanism, as occurs with the other biogenic amines. Instead the termination of cholinergic transmission is primarily dependent on the breakdown of acetylcholine to choline and acetate, a reaction catalyzed by AChE, an enzyme that exists both in soluble and membrane bound forms. Inhibition of AChE activity by drugs enhances the stimulation of cholinergic receptors by acetylcholine. Neostigmine (Prostigmin) is a reversible inhibitor that does not cross the BBB and is used to improve muscle tone in cases of myasthenia gravis. As AChE inhibitors cause decreased fluid pressure in the eye, they are used to treat certain types of glaucoma. Centrally acting reversible inhibitors of AChE that penetrate the brain well after oral administration, such as donepezil (Aricept) and rivastigmine (Exelon), are used to improve the symptoms of Alzheimer disease and dementia associated with Parkinson disease. Irreversible inhibitors of AChE permanently inactivate the enzyme, such that restoration of activity requires synthesis of new protein, and such compounds are employed as insecticides and have been used as nerve gases (e.g., sarin, soman) in chemical warfare. 

========283========

Receptors 
Acetylcholine receptors fall into two major classes, muscarinic and nicotinic receptors, named for their respective naturally occurring agonists, muscarine and nicotine (Fig. 1.4–6). 
Muscarinic Receptors. Five subtypes of muscarinic receptors (M1 to M5) had been cloned and all are present in brain. They are coupled to G proteins, and either act directly on ion channels or are linked to a variety of second-messenger systems. M1, M3, and M5 are Gq/11-coupled whereas M2 and M4 are Gi-coupled. M1, M3, and M4 are primarily located in cerebral cortex and hippocampus, and mediate some of the effects of acetylcholine on learning and memory. High densities of M1 and M4 are located in striatum and mediate cholinergic signaling in extrapyramidal motor circuits and response to rewards. M2 receptors are concentrated in the basal forebrain, where they function as autoreceptors to control synthesis and release of acetylcholine. The M5 receptor is expressed at low levels in brain. 
Nonspecific muscarinic agonists include some naturally occurring alkaloids such as pilocarpine and arecoline and synthetic compounds such as carbachol, oxotremorine, and bethanechol. Such drugs are not used to treat CNS disorders but are employed to reduce symptoms of glaucoma and nonobstructive urinary retention, and to treat the dry mouth that occurs in Sjogren syndrome. Arecoline is the active ingredient in the areca nut and betel leaf that are chewed in many Asian cultures for the stimulating effect they induce. The most prominent adverse effects of muscarinic cholinergic agents (bradykinesia, gastrointestinal distress, salivation, and sweating) are mediated by activation of peripheral M1, M2, and M3 receptors. There are no subtype selective muscarinic agonists in clinical use, although they are being developed for potential use in treating cognitive disorders and in regulating the parasympathetic nervous system. 
The prototypical muscarinic antagonists are atropine and scopolamine, which occur naturally in the plant deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna). The translation of “belladonna” from Italian is “beautiful woman,” and this name was given because some women used to apply belladonna berry juice to their eyes in order dilate the pupils, giving them a striking appearance. Ingestion of muscarinic antagonists leads to other effects resulting from inhibition of the parasympathetic nervous system, such as dry mouth, constipation, and urinary retention, in addition to central effects such as cognitive impairment and in extreme cases, delirium. Antagonists of muscarinic antagonists have some therapeutic uses. For example scopolamine has anti-emetic activity and is used to treat nausea and vomiting caused by motion sickness. In addition, muscarinic antagonists 

========284========

such as benztropine (Cogentin) and trihexyphenidyl (Artane) are employed to treat the motor symptoms of Parkinson disease, and are also sometimes helpful in ameliorating tardive dystonia, a possible side effect induced by long-term use of “typical” antipsychotic drugs. Many psychotropic drugs possess unwanted muscarinic antagonistic properties, including some TCAs and antipsychotic drugs. Some first-generation H1 antagonist antihistamines are sold in over-the-counter hypnotics and anti-allergy medications and these drugs also have significant muscarinic antagonist actions that are responsible for side effects such as dry mouth, constipation, urinary retention, and even delirium to which geriatric patients are more susceptible. 
Nicotinic Receptors. These are ligand-gated ion channels located at the neuromuscular junction, autonomic ganglia, adrenal medulla, brain, and spinal cord. Nicotinic receptors that are expressed in both neurons and muscle mediate rapid, excitatory signaling but differ in their subunit composition. Every nicotinic receptor consists of five subunit molecules arranged around a central channel that opens to admit ions when the receptor is activated. The subunit combination affects the pharmacological and functional properties of an individual complex, such as cation permeability and the rate of desensitization. These various nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits are categorized into three general functional classes: (1) skeletal muscle subunits (α1, β1, δ, and ε), (2) standard neuronal subunits (α2–α6 and β2–β4), and (3) subunits capable of forming homomeric receptors (α7–α9) where all five subunits are the same. Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are widely distributed in brain, but they do not appear to function in the classical postsynaptic, directly excitatory manner of their muscle counterparts. Indeed, a large proportion of nicotinic binding sites are found on pre-, peri- and extrasynaptic sites in addition to the classic postsynaptic location. 
Nicotinic receptors have been implicated in several pathological conditions. For example, mutations in one of the nicotinic receptor subunit genes is responsible for a specific form of epilepsy, autosomal dominant frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE). In addition, a nicotinic receptor subunit gene mutation may be among the factors predisposing individuals to schizophrenia, and α7-nicotinic receptors have emerged as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of neurocognitive dysfunctions in schizophrenia. In Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease, there is a significant loss of high affinity nicotinic receptor sites, which may contribute to the pathophysiological changes underlying the cognitive decline observed in these conditions. Because of the evidence for their involvement in a number of CNS disorders, there is great interest in the future development of selective nicotinic receptor agonists as therapeutics. 

========285========

The most obvious role of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors is mediation of reinforcing and addicting properties of nicotine in chronic tobacco and e-cigarette users, in addition to the symptoms of withdrawal experienced upon cessation of use. The reinforcing effects of nicotine depend on its interaction with nicotinic receptors in the brain’s reward system, notably in releasing dopamine from neurons that originate in the VTA and innervate the nucleus accumbens. 
Although drugs such as hexamethonium and mecamylamine are useful pharmacological tools used to block nicotinic receptors, there are relatively few nicotinic agonists or antagonists that are used therapeutically. One example is succinylcholine, a weak partial agonist at nicotinic receptors, which is used clinically during anesthesia as a paralytic agent. Varenicline (Chantix) is a partial agonist with selectivity at the α4/β2 nicotinic receptor, which is now widely marketed as medication to treat nicotine dependence and as an aid in cessation of smoking. Galantamine (Razadyne) is an allosteric potentiator of several subtypes of neuronal nicotinic receptor and a weak competitive reversible inhibitor of AChE, which is used in the treatment of Alzheimer disease. 
FIGURE 1.4–7. Schematic model of a central histaminergic synapse with site of drug action. Site 1: Histidine is taken up into histamine-containing neurons and converted to histamine by histidine decarboxylase. This enzyme is distinct from AADC that is used in the synthesis of other biogenic amines. No inhibitors of the histidine decarboxylase are used 

========286========

clinically. Site 2: Histamine is accumulated in storage vesicles by the action of VMAT. Reserpine interferes with vesicular storage of histamine. Sites 3 and 4: After release histamine interacts with postsynaptic receptors. Chlorpheniramine and diphenhydramine possess H1 antagonist properties and are used as anti-allergy medications. H1 antagonists, such as meclizine (Bonine) and dimenhydrinate (Dramamine) have proved useful in the treatment of motion sickness and vestibular disturbances. Site 5: Activation of autoreceptors serves to regulate subsequent release of histamine. Pitolisant is a selective inverse agonist at the H3 receptor that increases histamine release, and is used to treat excessive diurnal sleepiness. There are no therapeutic products that act as selective antagonists for H3 receptors. Site 6: There is no recapture of synaptic histamine, and its actions are terminated by metabolism by histamine n-methyltransferase. No selective drugs are used therapeutically to inhibit this enzyme. The metabolite, n-methylhistamine is a substrate for MAO. AADC, aromatic amino acid decarboxylase; AC, adenylate cyclase; cAMP, cyclic AMP; H1–3, subtypes of histamine receptor; HNMT, histamine N- methyltransferase; G, G protein; MAO, monoamine oxidase; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter. (Modified from Nestler E, Hyman S, Holtzman D Malenka R: Molecular Neuropharmacology, McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc; 2015.) 
HISTAMINE 
Anatomy and Functions 
In brain, histamine-containing neuronal cell bodies are restricted to the tuberomammillary complex of the posterior hypothalamus. Like other biogenic amine neurons, the histaminergic system comprises long, highly divergent, mostly unmyelinated, varicose fibers that provide diffuse projections to many telencephalic, mesencephalic, and cerebellar structures. Individual neurons can innervate widely divergent areas but make few typical synaptic contacts. 
Functions closely associated with histaminergic projections are the regulation of sleep and arousal, and control of feeding and appetite. In the periphery, histamine released from mast cells plays an important role in the allergic reactions, and histamine released from enterochromaffin-like cells and mast cells stimulates acid secretion in the stomach. 
Life Cycle 
Histamine is formed in brain primarily by decarboxylation of histidine by the enzyme histidine decarboxylase (Fig. 1.4–7), although histidine is also a substrate for AADC, which is also involved in the synthesis of the catecholamines and serotonin. The transporter protein responsible for concentrating histamine in synaptic vesicles has not been definitively established, although both reserpine and tetrabenazine, which interfere with VMAT-2 function, induce release of brain histamine. In brain, histamine is principally metabolized by histamine methyltransferase to the n-methylhistamine (tele-methylhistamine). In the periphery, histamine is also metabolized by diamine oxidase to imidazole acetaldehyde, an intermediate that is rapidly oxidized to imidazoleacetic acid. Unlike the other biogenic amines, there is no evidence for a specific plasma membrane 

========287========

transporter to recapture and terminate the effects of released histamine in brain. 
Receptors 
Four subtypes of histamine receptor have been identified (H1 to H4), and all belong to the G-protein–coupled superfamily of receptors (Fig. 1.4–7). In brain, H1 and H2 receptors are expressed both in neurons postsynaptic to histamine terminals and also in glia. Blockade of H1 receptors results in sedation, a side-effect inherent in some antipsychotic drugs, such as clozapine (Clozaril), antidepressant drugs, such as doxepin (Deptran) and allergy medications, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) that inhibit H1 receptors. In fact, the sedative property of doxepin is used therapeutically to alleviate the symptoms of primary insomnia. To overcome the sedating properties of H1 antagonists in treating allergic reactions, newer nonsedating antihistamines, such as loratadine (Claritin) have been designed that do not cross the BBB. H1 antagonists, such as meclizine (Antivert) and dimenhydrinate (Dramamine) are also effective in the treatment of motion sickness and vestibular disturbances such as Meniere disease. 
H2 receptors are expressed in neurons postsynaptic to histamine terminals. Compared with H1 receptors, much less is known of the function of H2 receptors, partly due to the inadequacy of specific agonists and antagonists that penetrate the BBB. H2 antagonists that do not cross the BBB, such as cimetidine (Tagamet) and ranitidine (Zantac) are used to lower secretion of gastric acid, and so reduce the pain and hasten the healing of gastric ulcers. 
H3 receptors are located presynaptically on histamine neurons where they serve as autoreceptors to inhibit the release of histamine. In addition, H3 receptors are present as heteroreceptors on terminals of other neurotransmitters to regulate their function. Recently a selective inverse agonist at the H3 receptor, pitolisant, has been shown to be effective at countering excessive diurnal sleepiness in narcolepsy, Parkinson disease, and obstructive sleep apnea. Antagonists and inverse agonists for the H3 receptor have potential as treatments for cognitive disorders. 
H4 receptors are present at low levels in brain, but are expressed in the periphery at several sites, including spleen, bone marrow, and leucocytes and are linked with regulation of the immune system. Increasing attention has been directed toward therapeutic modification of H4 receptor signaling in disorders such as allergy, asthma, chronic pruritus, and autoimmune diseases. 

========288========

REFERENCES 
Artigas F. Serotonin receptors involved in antidepressant effects. Pharmacol Ther. 2013;137:119– 131. 
*Beaulieu JM, Gainetdinov RR. The physiology, signaling, and pharmacology of dopamine receptors. Pharmacol Rev. 2011;63:182–217. 
Bernstein AI, Stout KA, Miller GW. The vesicular monoamine transporter 2: an underexplored pharmacological target. Neurochem Int. 2014;73:89–97. 
Black SA, Rylett RJ. Choline transporter CHT regulation and function in cholinergic neurons. Cent Nerv Syst Agents Med Chem. 2012;12:114–121. 
Buckley JS, Salpeter SR. A risk-benefit assessment of dementia medications: systematic review of the evidence. Drugs Aging. 2015;32:453–467. 
Carboni E, Silvagni A. Dopamine reuptake by norepinephrine neurons: exception or rule?. Crit Rev Neurobiol. 2004;16:121–128. 
Cools R, D’Esposito M. Inverted-U-shaped dopamine actions on human working memory and cognitive control. Biol Psychiatry. 2011;69:e113–e125. 
Deutch A, Roth R. Pharmacology and biochemistry of synaptic transmission. From molecules to networks. J. Bryne, R. Heidelberger, M. Waxham. New York: Academic Press; 207–237. Dickinson D, Elvevag B. Genes, cognition and brain through a COMT lens. Neuroscience. 2009;164:72–87. 
Eisenhofer G, Kopin IJ, Goldstein DS. Catecholamine metabolism: a contemporary view with implications for physiology and medicine. Pharmacol Rev. 2004;56:331–349. 
Fernstrom JD. Large neutral amino acids: dietary effects on brain neurochemistry and function. Amino Acids. 2013;45:419–430. 
Freedman R. Alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonists for cognitive enhancement in schizophrenia. Annu Rev Med. 2014;65:245–261. 
Gasbarri A, Pompili A. Serotonergic 5-HT7 receptors and cognition. Rev Neurosci. 2014;25:311– 323. 
Gowrishankar R, Hahn MK, Blakely RD. Good riddance to dopamine: roles for the dopamine transporter in synaptic function and dopamine-associated brain disorders. Neurochem Int. 2014;73:42–48. 
*Iversen LL, Iversen SD, Bloom FE, Roth RH. Introduction to Neuropsychopharmacology. New York: Oxford; 2009. 
McGuffin P, Alsabban S, Uher R. The truth about genetic variation in the serotonin transporter gene and response to stress and medication. Br J Psychiatry. 2011;198:424–427. 
*Meltzer HY, Massey BW, Horiguchi M. Serotonin receptors as targets for drugs useful to treat psychosis and cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2012;13:1572– 1586. 
Naoi M, Riederer P, Maruyama W. Modulation of monoamine oxidase (MAO) expression in neuropsychiatric disorders: genetic and environmental factors involved in type A MAO expression. J Neural Transm. 2015. 
*Nestler E, Hyman S, Holtzman D, Malenka R. Molecular Neuropharmacology, McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc; 2015. 

========289========

*Olivier B. Serotonin: a never-ending story. Eur J Pharmacol. 2015;753:2–18. 
Panula P, Nuutinen S. The histaminergic network in the brain: basic organization and role in disease. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013;14:472–487. 
Picciotto MR, Higley MJ, Mineur YS. Acetylcholine as a neuromodulator: cholinergic signaling shapes nervous system function and behavior. Neuron. 2012;76:116–129. 
Roeper J. Dissecting the diversity of midbrain dopamine neurons. Trends Neurosci. 2013;36:336–342. 
Sara SJ. The locus coeruleus and noradrenergic modulation of cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009;10:211–223. 
Seamans JK, Yang CR. The principal features and mechanisms of dopamine modulation in the prefrontal cortex. Prog Neurobiol. 2004;74:1–58. 
Shan L, Dauvilliers Y, Siegel JM. Interactions of the histamine and hypocretin systems in CNS disorders. Nat Rev Neurol. 2015;11:401–413. 
Tohen M, Case M, Trivedi MH, Thase ME, Burke SJ, Durell TM. Olanzapine/fluoxetine combination in patients with treatment-resistant depression: rapid onset of therapeutic response and its predictive value for subsequent overall response in a pooled analysis of 5 studies. J Clin Psychiatry. 2010;71:451–462. 
Witte AV, Floel A. Effects of COMT polymorphisms on brain function and behavior in health and disease. Brain Res Bull. 2012;88:418–428. 
Zimmerman G, Soreq H. Termination and beyond: acetylcholinesterase as a modulator of synaptic transmission. Cell Tissue Res. 2006;326:655–669. 

========290========

▲ 1.5 Amino Acid Neurotransmitters 
JOSEPH T. COYLE, M.D. 
For nearly 70 years, biogenic amines dominated thinking about the role of neurotransmitters in the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. However, over the past 15 years, evidence has accumulated from postmortem, brain imaging, and genetic studies that the amino acid neurotransmitters, in particular glutamic acid and GABA, play an important, if not central, role in the pathophysiology of a broad range of psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major depression, Alzheimer disease, and anxiety disorders. This is not entirely surprising given the fact that virtually every neuron in the CNS is innervated by GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons. Consistent with this, the concentrations of synaptic GABA and glutamate are in the millimolar range whereas biogenic amine and peptide neurotransmitters are in the micromolar range or lower. The purpose of this chapter is to review the current understanding of amino acid neurotransmitters and to address their potential involvement in psychiatric disorders. 
GLUTAMIC ACID 
Glutamate mediates fast excitatory neurotransmission in the brain and is the neurotransmitter for approximately 80 percent of brain synapses, particularly those associated with dendritic spines. The repolarization of neuronal membranes that have been depolarized by glutamatergic neurotransmission may account for as much as 80 percent of the energy expenditure in the brain. The concentration of glutamate in brain is 10 mM, the highest of all amino acids, of which approximately 20 percent represents the neurotransmitter pool of glutamate. 
The postsynaptic effects of glutamate are mediated by two families of receptors. The first are the glutamate-gated cation channels that are responsible for fast neurotransmission. The second type of glutamate receptor is the metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR), which are GPCRs like α-adrenergic receptors and dopamine receptors. The mGluRs primarily modulate glutamatergic neurotransmission. 
Synthesis of Glutamate 
Given the excitatory effects of glutamate, it is not surprising that it is excluded from the brain by the BBB. Thus, glutamate in the brain must be synthesized de novo from glucose through the tricarboxylic acid cycle, which generates α-ketoglutarate. The α-ketoglutarate receives an amino group via a transaminase reaction, converting it to glutamic acid. 

========291========

Glutamate is in equilibrium with α-ketoglutarate, and virtually all glucose entering the brain is cycled through glutamic acid. The portion of glutamate dedicated to neurotransmission (approximately 20 percent) is actively sequestered in storage vessels by the vesicular glutamate transporter. 
A second metabolic pathway is particularly important for replenishing synaptic glutamate. This pathway exploits the intimate relationship between the glutamatergic synapse (i.e., the synaptic bouton and the postsynaptic spine) and the astrocytic endfeet that envelop the synapse. It is the astrocyte and not the glutamatergic terminal that expresses glutamate transporters (EAAT1 and 2) that remove glutamate from the synapse, thereby terminating its action. Within the astrocyte, glutamine synthetase, a cytosolic adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent enzyme, catalyzes the conversion of glutamate to generate glutamine. Glutamine synthetase is expressed in glia but not neurons. Glutamine is then released by the astrocyte and taken up by the glutamatergic terminal where it is converted back to glutamate by phosphate-activated glutaminase, a mitochondrial enzyme. This process is known as the “glutamine cycle” and accounts for approximately 40 percent of glutamate turnover. 
Major Glutamatergic Pathways in the Brain 
All primary sensory afferent systems appear to use glutamate as their neurotransmitter including retinal ganglion cells, cochlear cells, trigeminal nerve, and spinal afferents. The thalamocortical projections that distribute afferent information broadly to the cortex are glutamatergic. The pyramidal neurons of the corticolimbic regions, the major source of intrinsic, associational, and efferent excitatory projections from the cortex are glutamatergic. A temporal lobe circuit that figures importantly in the development of new memories is a series of four glutamatergic synapses: The perforant path innervates the hippocampal granule cells that innervate CA3 pyramidal cells that innervate CA1 pyramidal cells. The climbing fibers innervating the cerebellar cortex are glutamatergic as well as the corticospinal tracks. 
Ionotropic Glutamate Receptors 
Three families of ionotropic glutamate receptors have been identified on the basis of selective activation by conformationally restricted or synthetic analogues of glutamate. These include α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4- isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA), kainic acid (KA), and N-methyl-D- aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors (Fig. 1.5–1). Subsequent cloning revealed 16 mammalian genes that encode structurally related proteins, which represent subunits that assemble into functional receptors. Glutamate- gated ion channel receptors appear to be tetramers, and subunit 

========292========

composition affects both the pharmacologic and the biophysical features of the receptor. 
AMPA receptors mediate the depolarizing postsynaptic currents primarily responsible for excitatory neurotransmission and are broadly distributed in the CNS (Fig. 1.5–2). The AMPA receptor family consists of four subunits of GluR1 to GluR4. However, additional complexities affect AMPA receptor function. Alternative splicing of a 115 bp cassette for GluR1 to GluR4 messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) results in two forms (flip and flop) that give rise to receptors that differ in desensitization rate and regional distribution in the brain. In the second transmembrane domain, GluR1, 3, and 4 have a glutamine (Q) residue that results in high Ca2+ conductance whereas GluR2 has an arginine (R) in this position that severely restricts Ca2+ passage and conducts only Na+, mRNA editing by adenosine deaminase, which converts the codon for GluR2 from an arginine to a glutamine. This radically increases the channel permeability to Ca2+ of AMPA receptors containing the edited GluR2 subunit. Similar mRNA editing mechanisms have been described for kainate receptors. 
The kainite receptor family consists of five subunits. GluR5 to GluR7 represents subunits that form glutamate-gated cation channels. KA1 and KA2 exhibit negligible channel activity but associate with GluR5 to GluR7 to form high-affinity kainate receptors. The role of kainate receptors is less clearly defined than that of AMPA receptors, but with their presynaptic localization on glutamatergic terminals, kainite receptors reduce glutamatergic neurotransmission when activated. 

========293========

FIGURE 1.5–1.NMDAreceptorligands. 
Seven genes encode subunits that comprise the NMDA receptor family. The NMDA receptor has several unique features (Fig. 1.5–3). First, the channel is blocked by magnesium (Mg2+) at resting membrane potential. Thus, NMDA receptors are “silent” until activated AMPA receptors have sufficiently depolarized the neuronal membrane to relieve the Mg2+ blockade. The NMDA receptor requires the simultaneous binding of two ligands to two separate recognition sites in order for the channel to open. On the NR1 subunit, which forms the channel, is a binding site termed the glycine modulatory site, for which glycine and D-serine are the endogenous ligands. On the second nonchannel subunit (NR2A-D) is the binding site for the neurotransmitter glutamate. Unless the glycine modulatory site is occupied, glutamate cannot open the channel. The NMDA receptor has been described as a coincidence detector because these three events must occur simultaneously for the channel to open. Thus, it becomes functional only when a sufficient amount of presynaptic glutamate has been released to saturate the receptor, glycine and/or D-serine are released, and the synaptic membrane is sufficiently depolarized to remove the Mg2+ blockade. Typically, for this to occur, multiple, converging glutamatergic afferents fire simultaneously. 
The NMDA receptor channel is sufficiently large that Ca2+ readily passes through it. Intracellularly, Ca2+ activates a number of kinases that ultimately affect gene expression in the neuron. For example, the 

========294========

immediate-early gene cFos is a sensitive surrogate for NMDA receptor activation. The type of NR2 subunit affects the pharmacology and biophysics of the NMDA receptor. For example, NR2B-containing receptors are much more Ca2+ permeable than NR2A-containing receptors. NR2A-containing receptors are expressed primarily in corticolimbic regions in the mature brain. NR2B is expressed at high levels in the immature cortex and decreases with maturation. NR2C is expressed primarily in the cerebellum, and NR2D is localized predominately to the cerebellum and midbrain brainstem. 
FIGURE 1.5–2. The postsynaptic density of the excitatory synapse. The NMDA receptor is bound to the principal organizing protein, PSD-95. Effector enzymes such as nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and calmodulin-activated protein kinase II (CaMKII) are also bound to PSD- 95, keeping them in close proximity to the Ca2+ permeable NMDA receptor channel. PSD-95 is connected to the intracellular cytoskeletal protein, F-action by α-actinin. PSD-95 also is attached to neuronal membrane lipid rafts, which indirectly links it to the AMPA receptor through glutamate receptor interacting protein (GRIP). Finally, postsynaptic group I mGluR receptors are linked to PSD-95 by the scaffolding proteins Shank and Homer. 

========295========

FIGURE 1.5–3. Schematic representation of the NMDA receptor. The NMDA receptor is a heterotetramer composed of the NR1 subunit that comprises the channel and the NR2 subunit, which contains the ligand binding site for the agonist, glutamate. The channel is blocked at the resting membrane potential by Mg2+. The glycine modulatory site on the NR1 subunit must be occupied by the endogenous agonists, D-serine or glycine, for the channel to open. The channel accommodates both Na+ and Ca2+. A polyamine site positively modulates the receptor. Within the channel is the binding site for dissociative anesthetics, which are use-dependent, noncompetitive inhibitors of the NMDA receptor. 
Given their prominent role in learning and in excitotoxicity (see below), it is not surprising that NMDA receptors are among the most tightly regulated of neurotransmitter receptors. As described above, two separate ligands must be bound to two distinct subunits on the NMDA receptor for it to function. In addition, there are binding sites for Zn2+ and H+ that inhibit ion flux. A polyamine site enhances channel opening. Furthermore, the channel is sensitive to its redox state, which also affects ion currents. Subunit composition affects responses to modulators. For example, the NR2A subunit is much more sensitive to inhibition by Zn2+ whereas the NR2B is differentially more sensitive to the polyamine site antagonist ifenprodil. The influx of Ca2+ via the NMDA receptor activates calmodulin, which then binds to the C-terminus of NR1 and reduces channel opening frequency and duration. 
Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors 
These receptors are so designated because their effects are mediated by G- proteins. All mGluRs are activated by glutamate although their sensitivities vary remarkably. To date, eight mGluRs have been cloned. These genes encode seven membrane-spanning proteins that are members of the superfamily of GPCRs. They are sub-grouped into three classes based upon 

========296========

amino acid sequence homology, agonist pharmacology, and signal transduction pathway utilized. Group I mGluRs, which includes mGluR1 and 5, activate PLC, presumably through GQ, group II includes mGluR2 and 3, and group III includes mGluR4, 6, 7, and 8. Group II and III mGluRs inhibit adenylyl cyclase through Gi protein. The abundant neuropeptide N-acetylaspartylglutamate is a specific agonist at mGluR3. 
mGluRs located postsynaptically modulate a number of channels and receptors. All three groups inhibit L-type voltage-dependent calcium channels, and groups I and II inhibit N-type calcium channels. In addition, mGluRs are reported to close voltage-dependent K+ channels, thereby slowing depolarization and reducing excitability. Presynaptic mGluRs on both GABAergic and glutamatergic terminals inhibit neurotransmitter release, possibly by inhibiting the P/Q-type calcium channel. 
Postsynaptic Density 
Considerable advances have been made in characterizing the organization and dynamics of glutamate receptors at the postsynaptic density. The PSD is a multiprotein complex that contains scaffolding proteins, cell adhesion molecules, and proteins for intercellular signaling pathways. A major scaffolding protein is PSD-95 (an acronym for PSD protein with a molecular weight of 95 kDa). PSD-95 contains several regions that bind other proteins. There are three PDZ domains (an acronym for PSD-95/disc large/zona occludens-1). The PDZ domains contain approximately 90 amino acids that bind the C-termini of proteins with complementary amino acid sequences. Neuroligin binds to the PDZ and extends into the synaptic cleft to bind to β-neurexin, which is anchored to the presynaptic component of the synapse. This arrangement stabilizes the synapse by connecting pre- and postsynaptic components. Two N-terminal cysteines of PSD-95 bind palmitic acid, which links the protein to lipid rafts in the plasma membrane. The NR2 subunit of the NMDA receptor binds to the PDZ domain. PSD-95 also binds α-actin, which is bound to filamentous actin, an important component of the cytoskeletal complex in the dendritic spine. 
In contrast to NMDA receptors, AMPA receptors do not appear to bind directly to PSD-95 but are associated with it indirectly by binding to intermediary proteins that bind to PSD-95. These include glutamate receptor interacting protein (GRIP), protein interacting with C-kinase1 (PICK1), and synapse associated protein of 97 kDa (SAP-97). In addition, there are the transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins (TARPs), which are involved in transporting AMPA receptors to and intercalating them within the PSD. Whereas the number of NMDA receptors in mature synapses tend to be relatively constant, the number of AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic densities varies tremendously. In fact, 

========297========

there are some postsynaptic densities that contain no AMPA receptors but do contain NMDA receptors. They are referred to as “silent synapses” because glutamate has no excitatory effects since the NMDA receptors are inactivated at the resting membrane potential. With the exception of mGluR7, postsynaptic mGluRs are tethered to the periphery of the PSD by binding to two scaffolding proteins homer and shank, the latter of which binds to PSD-95. Notably, mutations in proteins that comprise the PSD including neurexin, neuroligin, and shank have been implicated in autism. 
The Role of Astrocytes 
Specialized endfeet of the astrocyte surround glutamatergic synapses. The astrocyte expresses the two Na+-dependent glutamate transporters that play the primary role in removing glutamate from the synapse, thereby terminating its action: EAAT1 and EAAT2 (excitatory amino acid transporter). The neuronal glutamate transporter, EAAT3, is expressed in upper motor neurons whereas EAAT4 is expressed primarily in cerebellar Purkinje cells and EAAT5 in retina. Mice homozygous for null mutations of either EAAT1 or EAAT2 exhibit elevated extracellular glutamate and excitotoxic neurodegeneration. Notably, several studies have described the loss of EAAT2 protein and transport activity in the ventral horn in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). 
The astrocytes express AMPA receptors so that they can monitor synaptic glutamate release. GlyT1, which maintains subsaturating concentrations of glycine in the synapse, is expressed on the astrocyte plasma membrane. GlyT1 transports three Na+ out for each molecule of glycine transported into the astrocyte. This stoichiometry results in a robust reversal of the direction of transport when glutamate released in the synapse activates the AMPA receptors on the astrocyte, thus depolarizing the astrocyte. Thus, glycine release in the synapse by GlyT1 is coordinated with glutamatergic neurotransmission. D-serine, which is found primarily in forebrain, is synthesized by serine racemase (SR), which is expressed primarily in pyramidal neurons and to a lesser extent GABAergic neurons. D-Serine levels are also determined by D-amino acid oxidase (DAAO) with low D-serine levels in the cerebellum and brainstem where DAAO expression is high, and high D-serine levels are found in corticolimbic brain regions where DAAO expression is quite low. In contrast, the expression of GlyT1 is highest in the cerebellum and brainstem. This distribution suggests that D-serine is the primary modulator of the NMDA receptor in the forebrain whereas glycine is more prominent in the brainstem and cerebellum. Nevertheless, GlyT1 inhibitors have pro-cognitive effects in experimental animals and are being tested clinically for the treatment of cognitive impairment and negative symptoms in schizophrenia. 

========298========

Plasticity in Glutamatergic Neurotransmission 
Hebb postulated that learning and memory involved use-dependent changes in synaptic efficacy. Neurophysiological studies, originally exploiting the identifiable glutamatergic Schaffer collateral synapse on the hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cell, showed that a brief period of intense stimulation of the Schaffer collateral (100 Hz) resulted in a subsequent persistent increase in the efficacy of synaptic neurotransmission at these synapses. This phenomenon is known as long-term potentiation (LTP) and is quite widespread with regard to glutamatergic synapses. In contrast, a period of stable low-frequency stimulation of the glutamatergic axons results in a persistent reduced efficacy of synaptic neurotransmission, a phenomenon known as long-term depression (LTD). LTP in these hippocampal studies requires the activation of NMDA receptors as demonstrated by the fact that it is blocked by NMDA receptor antagonists such as the dissociative anesthetics ketamine and phencyclidine (PCP). Conditions resulting in blockade of LTP in the hippocampus are associated with impairments in the acquisition of new memories. The nature of these plastic changes has been the focus of intense research. The persistent changes in synaptic efficacy in LTP and LTD result from the insertion (LTP) or removal (LTD) of AMPA receptors from the postsynaptic densities of affected synapses. Thus, in contrast to the NMDA receptors, the AMPA receptors are quite dynamic, and their synaptic function is controlled through trafficking. 
The extinction of conditioned fear has been shown to be an active process mediated by the activation of NMDA receptors in the amygdala. Treatment of rats with NMDA receptor antagonists prevents the extinction of conditioned fear whereas treatment with the glycine modulatory site partial agonist D-cycloserine facilitates the extinction of conditioned fear. (D-Cycloserine is an antibiotic used to treat tuberculosis that has 50 percent of the efficacy of glycine at the NMDA receptor.) To determine whether the phenomenon generalizes to humans, patients with acrophobia were administered either placebo or a single dose of D-cycloserine along with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). D-Cycloserine plus CBT resulted in a highly significant reduction in acrophobic symptoms that persisted for at least 3 months as compared to placebo plus CBT. Other placebo-controlled clinical trials support the notion that D-cycloserine is a robust enhancer of CBT, suggesting that pharmacologically augmenting neural plasticity may be used to bolster psychological interventions. 
Glutamate-mediated synaptic plasticity is not only functional it is also structural. Dendritic spines are dynamic appendages. Such dynamics have cleverly been demonstrated in real time in vitro and in vivo in the brains of mice in which a gene from jellyfish that encodes a green fluorescent protein is inserted into the mouse genome in a manner so that only glutamatergic 

========299========

neurons become fluorescent. Persistent activation of NMDA receptors results in spine maturation from long and skinny to fat and stubby and even the elaboration of new spines. This is mediated in part by the influx of calcium through the activated NMDA receptors. Such rapid structural changes in the synaptic spine reflect the fact that protein synthesis (i.e., translation) occurs within individual spines. 
Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), which is deficient in individuals with fragile X syndrome, appears to be synthesized locally within the spine during times of NMDA receptor activation and also plays a role in transporting specific mRNAs to the spine for translation. Notably, mice in which the FMRP gene has been inactivated through a null mutation as well as patients with Fragile X syndrome have fewer dendritic spines, the preponderance of which have an immature morphology. Loss of FMRP exaggerates responses of mGluR5, which stimulates dendritic protein synthesis, and treatment with an mGluR5 antagonist reverses the fragile-X- like phenotype in mice with the FMRP gene inactivated. 
Excitotoxicity 
In the early 1970s, it was shown that the systemic administration of large amounts of monosodium glutamate to immature animals resulted in the degeneration of neurons in brain regions where the blood–brain barrier was deficient. Subsequent studies showed that the direct injection of ionotropic glutamate receptor agonists such as kainic acid, ibotenic acid, and NMDA caused a pattern of neuronal degeneration that affected neurons with their cell bodies in proximity to the injection site but spared axons passing through the area arising from distant neurons. Persistent and overwhelming activation of AMPA/kainate receptors and NMDA receptors causes a tremendous influx of Na+ and Ca2+ and a secondary influx of H2O. The resulting acute cellular edema causes a necrotic cell death. At sites more distant from the injection, the persistent elevation of Ca2+ disrupts the mitochondria, which release cytochrome C and activate caspases, resulting in programmed cell death (apoptosis). 
The neuronal degeneration occurring after ischemic stroke is the result of excitotoxicity. Local hypoxia due to ischemia results in a cessation of ATP production, causing the collapse of the sodium gradient across the neuronal membrane and astroglial membrane. As a consequence, the vector of the sodium-dependent glutamate transporters is reversed, causing a massive release of glutamate. Although a number of drugs that block the ionotropic glutamate receptors or the downstream events caused by their overstimulation have proved effective in reducing the amount of neuronal damage in animal models of stroke, no agent has yet proved effective in clinical trials. 
Excitotoxicity has also been implicated in the proximate cause of 

========300========

neuronal degeneration in Alzheimer disease. Most evidence points to the toxic consequences of aggregates of β-amyloid, especially β-amyloid1–42. The β-amyloid fibrils depolarize neurons, resulting in loss of the Mg2+ block and enhanced NMDA receptor sensitivity to glutamate. The fibrils also impair glutamate transport into astrocytes, thereby increasing the extracellular concentration of glutamate. β-Amyloid directly promotes oxidative stress through inflammation that further contributes to neuronal vulnerability to glutamate. Thus, several mechanisms contribute to neuronal vulnerability to NMDA-receptor-mediated excitotoxicity in Alzheimer disease. Memantine, a recently approved treatment for mild to moderate Alzheimer disease, is a weak noncompetitive inhibitor of NMDA receptors. It reduces tonic sensitivity of NMDA receptors to excitotoxicity but does not interfere with “phasic” neurotransmission, thereby attenuating neuronal degeneration in Alzheimer disease. 
Inhibitory Amino Acids: GABA 
GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain where it is broadly distributed and occurs in millimolar concentrations. In view of its physiological effects and distributions, it is not surprising that the dysfunction of GABAergic neurotransmission has been implicated in a broad range of neuropsychiatric disorders including anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, alcohol dependence, and seizure disorders. Chemically, GABA differs from glutamic acid, the major excitatory neurotransmitter, simply by the removal of a single carboxy group from the latter. 
GABA is synthesized from glutamic acid by GAD, which catalyzes the removal of the α-carboxyl group. In the CNS, the expression of GAD appears to be restricted to GABAergic neurons although in the periphery it is expressed in pancreatic islet cells. Two distinct but related genes encode GAD. GAD65 is localized to nerve terminals where it is responsible for synthesizing GABA that is concentrated in the synaptic vesicles. Consistent with its role in fast inhibitory neurotransmission, mice homozygous for a null mutation of GAD65 have an elevated risk for seizures. GAD67 appears to be the primary source for neuronal GABA because mice homozygous for a null mutation of GAD67 die at birth, have a cleft pallet, and exhibit major reductions in brain GABA. 
GABA is catabolized by GABA transaminase (GABA-T) to yield succinic semialdehyde. Transamination generally occurs when the parent compound, α-ketoglutarate, is present to receive the amino group, thereby regenerating glutamic acid. Succinic semialdehyde is oxidized by succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) into succinic acid, which re-enters the Krebs cycle. GABA-T is a cell surface, membrane-bound enzyme, which is oriented toward the extracellular compartment and is expressed by both neurons and glia. As would be anticipated, drugs that inhibit the catabolism 

========301========

of GABA have anticonvulsant properties. One of the mechanisms of action of VPA is the competitive inhibition of GABA-T. γ-Vinyl-GABA is a suicide substrate inhibitor of GABA-T that is used as an anticonvulsant in Europe (vigabatrin [Sabril]). 
The synaptic action of GABA is also terminated by high-affinity transport back into the presynaptic terminal as well as into astrocytes. Four genetically distinct GABA high-affinity transporters have been identified with differing kinetic and pharmacological characteristics. They all share homology with other neurotransmitter transporters with the characteristic of 12 membrane-spanning domains. The active transport is driven by the sodium gradient so that upon depolarization, transportation of GABA out of the neuron is favored. GABA transported into astrocytes is catabolized by GABA-T and ultimately converted to glutamic acid and then to glutamine, which is transported back into the presynaptic terminal for GABA synthesis. Tiagabine (Gabitril) is a potent GABA transport inhibitor that is used to treat epilepsy. 
Anatomy of GABAergic Systems 
In the corticolimbic regions of the brain GABA is localized to the intrinsic (i.e., local circuit) neurons. In the columnar organization of the cerebral cortex, the GABAergic neurons provide the outer boundaries of the column with inwardly directed axons. While the GABAe​rgic interneurons comprise a minority of cortical neurons (15 to 25 percent), they exert a profound degree of inhibition of the activity of the glutamatergic pyramidal cells. The remarkable efficacy of inhibition reflects two neuroanatomical features of GABAergic synapses, which are concentrated on the shafts of spines to mitigate glutamatergic depolarization and on the neuronal cell body and proximal axon to restrict the generation of action potentials. In the cortex the GABAergic interneurons are the primary site of colocalization of neuropeptides. These include CCK, dynorphin, neuropeptide Y (NPY), somatostatin, substance P, and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). 
In the striatum, GABAergic neurons project directly to the substantia nigra pars reticulata, which regulates dopaminergic neuronal activity. In addition, there are striatal GABAergic neurons that project to the globus pallidus to synapse on pallidal–subthalamic GABAergic neurons that regulate the excitatory output from the subthalamic nucleus. In the cerebellum, GABAergic Purkinje cells are its main efferent system. 
GABAA Receptors 
GABAA receptors are distributed throughout the brain. The GABAA receptor complex, when activated, mediates an increase in membrane conductance with an equilibrium potential near the resting membrane potential of −70 mV (Fig. 1.5–4). In the mature neuron, this typically 

========302========

results in an influx of Cl−, causing membrane hyperpolarization. Hyperpolarization is inhibitory because it increases the threshold for generating an action potential. In immature neurons, which have unusually high levels of intracellular Cl−, activating the GABAA receptor can counterintuitively cause depolarization. For this reason, anticonvulsants that act by enhancing GABAA receptor activity may actually exacerbate seizures in the neonatal period. 
FIGURE 1.5–4.SchematicrepresentationoftheGABAA receptor. The receptor–channel complex is a heteropentamer. The GABA binding site is at the interface of the α and β subunits. The benzodiazepine binding site is at the interface between the γ and α subunits. 
The GABAA receptor subunits exhibit sequence homology to a larger family of ligand-gated channels including the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and the glycine receptor. At least 19 distinct but closely related genes have been identified that encode GABAA receptor subunits. Each subunit contains four α-helical membrane-spanning domains, the sequences of which are highly conserved among the subunits. The receptor complex is a heteropentamer. The ligand binding site is formed at the interface between the α- and the β-subunits. The subunit composition affects the biophysical and pharmacological characteristics of the receptor. Different subunit-containing GABAA receptor complexes are expressed at different stages of development as well as in different regions of the brain. 
The pharmacology of GABAA receptors is particularly rich. A component of the extracts of the psychoactive mushroom Amanita muscaria is muscimol, which is a direct agonist at the GABAA receptor. The 

========303========

prototypical GABAA antagonist is bicuculline, which acts by decreasing the frequency and duration of channel opening and has proconvulsant effects. Picrotoxin, another proconvulsant, acts by blocking the chloride channel. 
Reminiscent of the NMDA receptor, the GABAA receptor complex is noteworthy for multiple allosteric modulatory interactions. These include benzodiazepines, barbiturates, general anesthetics, ethanol, and neurosteroids. Benzodiazepines bind to a distinct site in the GABAA receptor complex and allosterically increase the frequency of channel opening in response to GABA. Therefore, benzodiazepines do not directly activate the receptor, but they enhance the phasic responses to synaptically released GABA. This indirect mechanism of action and the localization of benzodiazepine-sensitive receptors account for the lower risk of respiratory suppression for benzodiazepines as compared to that of barbiturates. The benzodiazepine site is allosterically linked to the binding sites of other modulatory ligands, which can contribute to toxic interactions. Notably, antagonists and inverse agonists for the benzodiazepine receptor have been developed that demonstrate anxiogenic effects. 
Barbiturates such as phenobarbital and pentobarbital are noted for their sedative and anticonvulsant activities. Barbiturates allosterically increase the affinities of the binding sites for GABA and benzodiazepines at concentrations that are pharmacologically relevant. Barbiturates also affect channel dynamics by markedly increasing the long open state and reducing the short open state, thereby increasing Cl− conductance and inhibition. Chemically modified analogs of progesterone and corticosterone have been shown in behavioral studies to have sedative and anxiolytic effects through their interaction with the GABAA receptor complex. They share features with barbiturates although they act at a distinctly different site. Thus, they allosterically enhance agonist binding to the receptor and increase the duration of Cl− channel opening. A variety of behavioral effects associated with steroid administration or fluctuation of endogenous steroids and sex- specific affects of GABAergic drugs have been linked to the action of endogenous neurosteroids. 
With regard to GABAA receptor antagonists, picrotoxin, like the barbiturates, alters channel dynamics but in the opposite direction by reducing long open states and favoring the briefest open state. The proconvulsant pentylenetetrazol also acts by reducing Cl− channel permeability. Penicillin, which at high concentrations is proconvulsant, binds to the positively charged residues in the channel, thereby occluding it. As a general class, anesthetics including barbiturates, steroids, and volatile anesthetics increase chloride conductance, thereby inhibiting neurotransmissions. Amino acids in the membrane-spanning domain of the GABA receptor subunits confer sensitivity to anesthetics. The precise mechanism whereby ethanol enhances GABAA receptor function remains 

========304========

unclear due to inconsistent results, suggesting that subunit composition may be important. However, recent studies suggest that ethanol increases the response of the tonic GABA-activated currents, which contain the δ- subunit and exhibit remarkably high affinity for GABA. 
Recombinant DNA strategies exploiting site-directed mutagenesis have permitted the identification of sites on the specific subunits that mediate the pharmacological action of drugs such as the benzodiazepines. Removal of the binding ability for benzodiazepines has established that the α1- subunit plays a major role in the sedative and amnestic effects of benzodiazepines whereas inactivating the benzodiazepine site on the α2- subunit eliminates the anxiolytic effect of benzodiazepines. 
GABAB Receptors 
The GABAB receptors are distinguished pharmacologically from GABAA receptors by the fact that they are insensitive to the canonical GABAA receptor antagonist bicuculline and that they are potently activated by baclofen [β-(4-chlorophenyl)-γ-aminobutyric acid], which is inactive at GABAA receptors. They are members of the G-protein–coupled superfamily of receptors but are highly unusual as they are made of a dimer of two seven transmembrane-spanning subunits. GABAB receptors are widely distributed throughout the nervous system and are localized both pre- and postsynaptically. The postsynaptic GABAB receptors cause a long-lasting hyperpolarization by activating potassium channels. Presynaptically, they act as auto- and heteroreceptors to inhibit neurotransmitter release. 
All GABAB receptors in the vertebrate brain are the sole products of the GABAB(1) and GABAB(2) genes (Fig. 1.5–5). Pharmacological heterogeneity among GABAB receptors reflects different isoforms resulting from splice variants. The most common variants that are conserved across species are GABAB(1A) and GABAB(1B). They exhibit different regional distributions in the brain where, for example, GABAB(1A) transcripts are confined to the granule cell layer whereas GABAB(1B) transcripts are expressed primarily in Purkinje cells. All GABAB agonists and competitive antagonists bind to the extracellular domain of the GABAB(1) subunit. The GABAB(2) subunit also has a large extracellular domain, which may be the site for allosteric modulation of the GABAB receptor. Interestingly, there is a binding site for Ca2+ in the ligand-binding pocket of the GABAB (1) subunit that increases the affinity for GABA. This Ca2+ binding site is typically saturated at physiological concentrations of Ca2+. 

========305========

FIGURE 1.5–5. Schematic representation of the GABAB receptor. This G-protein– coupled receptor GPCR is a heterodimer of two seven-membrane-spanning GPCRs. The extensive extracellular domains have the binding sites for GABA and allosteric modulators. 
γ-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB), which is approved for the treatment of narcolepsy, has been misused as a “date rape” drug because it rapidly induces deep sleep. Although high-affinity binding sites for GHB have been described in the brain, the sedative and hypnotic effects of exogenous GHB can be prevented by GABAB receptor antagonists. Furthermore, administration of GHB to GABAB−/− mice resulted in no behavioral effects of GHB. 
Glycine as a Neurotransmitter 
Glycine is an inhibitory neurotransmitter primarily in the brainstem and spinal cord, although the expression of glycine receptor subunits in the thalamus, cortex, and hippocampus suggest a broader role. Glycine is a nonessential amino acid that is synthesized in the brain from L-serine by serine hydroxymethyltransferase. Glycine is concentrated within synaptic vesicles by H+-dependent vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter (VIAAT or VGAT), which also transports GABA. Termination of the synaptic action of glycine is through reuptake into the presynaptic terminal by the glycine transporter II (GlyT2), which is quite distinct from GlyT1 that is expressed in astrocytes and modulates NMDA receptor function. 
The inhibitory effects of glycine are mediated by a ligand-gated chloride channel, which can also respond to β-alanine, taurine, L-alanine, L-serine, and proline but not to GABA. The canonical antagonist for the glycine receptor is the plant alkaloid strychnine. The receptor was first identified 

========306========

through the specific binding of [3H]strychnine. [3H]Glycine binds to two sites: One that is displaceable by strychnine and represents the glycine A receptor and a second that is insensitive to strychnine and is designated the glycine B receptor, representing the glycine modulatory site on the NMDA receptor. 
The glycine A receptor is a macromolecular complex of approximately 250 kDa that is comprised of five subunits surrounding a central pore. There are two subunits with a high degree of homology: The 48-kDa α- subunit and the 58-kDa β-subunit. The subunits display a structural similarity to other members of this ion channel family with four hydrophobic domains that span the lipid bilayer in α helices. The binding site for both glycine and strychnine is located on the α-subunit. There are four genes that encode α-subunits, but only one gene encodes for the β- subunit. Interestingly, the β-subunit is expressed fairly abundantly in rostral brain regions that exhibit no [3H]strychnine binding or α-subunit expression. 
Hyperekplexia is a disorder due to mutations in genes encoding components of the glycinergic synapse. It is characterized by stiffness and excessive startle in infancy that subsides with maturation. Mutations causing hyperekplexia have been described in the α-subunit (GLRA1) and in the β-subunit (GLRB) of the glycine receptor but also in GlyT2 (SLC6A5). 
Neuropsychiatric Implications of Amino Acid Transmitters 
Schizophrenia. Evidence accumulating from postmortem, pharmacological, and genetic studies is shifting the focus of the pathophysiology of schizophrenia from dopamine to glutamate and GABA. Indeed, after the use of dopamine D2 receptor antagonists as the sole treatment of schizophrenia for the last 50 years, over two-thirds of the treated patients remain substantially disabled. Early postmortem studies indicated a reduction in the activity of GAD in the cortex in patients with schizophrenia as compared to suitable controls. With the advent of immunocytochemistry and gene expression techniques, it has been possible to more precisely define the GABAergic deficit in schizophrenia. It appears that the parvalbumin-positive GABAergic interneurons in the intermediate layers of the cortex bear the brunt of the pathology, which includes reduced expression of GAD67, parvalbumin, and the GABA transporter (GAT). The finding that GABAA receptors are upregulated, as measured by autoradiography or with antibodies, supports the theory that these changes reflect hypofunction of the presynaptic GABAergic neurons. These particular GABAergic interneurons, which include the chandelier cells, play an important role in negative feedback inhibition to the pyramidal cells in the cortex. In spite of this highly reproducible neuropathology, genes 

========307========

related to GABAergic function have not figured prominently in genome- wide searches, suggesting that GABAergic deficits may be a downstream consequence of some more proximal genetic defects. 
The theory that hypofunction of NMDA receptors is an etiologic factor in schizophrenia initially arose from the observation that PCP and related dissociative anesthetics that block NMDA receptors produce a syndrome that can be indistinguishable from schizophrenia (Fig. 1.5–6). Dissociative anesthetics are so named because they prevent the acquisition of new memories without diminishing the apparent level of consciousness. In fact, under laboratory conditions, low-dose infusion of ketamine can produce the positive symptoms, negative symptoms, and specific cognitive deficits associated with schizophrenia in clear consciousness. Subsequent studies indicated that low-dose ketamine can also cause enhanced amphetamine- induced subcortical dopamine release as is observed in schizophrenia as well as abnormal cortical event-related potentials (ERPs) and disruption of prepulse inhibition in experimental animals. 
Early gene studies in schizophrenia were limited by biased selection of “candidate” genes and small numbers of subjects, resulting in contradictory results. Recently, a large genome wide association study comparing nearly 40,000 subjects with schizophrenia to a hundred thousand controls identified 108 sites on the genome, which attained the stringent level of genome-wide significance (5 × 10−8). Notably, none contributed more than 5 percent to the ascribable risk for schizophrenia, indicating that schizophrenia was a disorder of complex genetics like diabetes with multiple risk genes of modest effects interacting with environment to produce the phenotype. Three major categories of risk genes were identified: major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes, genes related to neurotransmission and genes involved in development. Nearly a dozen genes are within 2 degrees of separation from the NMDA receptor including SR. Genetic inactivation of SR in mice results in a phenotype that shares many features with the neurochemical, neuronal structural and cognitive features of schizophrenia. 

========308========

FIGURE 1.5–6.Pathologicalcircuitinschizophrenia.TheNMDAreceptorsontherapidly firing parvalbumin (PV) expressing GABAergic interneurons in the intermediate layers of the cortex are disproportionately sensitive to antagonists or loss of the co-agonist, D-serine. NMDA receptor hypofunction causes reduced expression of PV, GAD67, and the GABA transporter and upregulation of GABAA receptors on pyramidal neurons. Disinhibition of the pyramidal neurons causes cognitive dysfunction and negative symptoms and drives excessive subcortical dopamine release resulting in psychosis. 
Several clinical trials have been carried out with agonists at the glycine modulatory site on the NMDA receptor on patients receiving concurrent treatment with antipsychotic medications. The hypothesis being tested was that enhancing NMDA receptor function would reduce negative symptoms and improve cognition, aspects of the disorder unaffected by antipsychotic drugs. A meta-analysis of the results of these placebo-controlled trials of agonists at the NMDA receptor glycine modulatory site revealed highly significant reductions in depression, negative symptoms, cognitive deficits, and even positive symptoms. 
Recent findings have provided a link between the GABAergic neuropathology and NMDA receptor hypofunction. Chronic treatment of rats with NMDA receptor antagonists causes a downregulation of GAD67, parvalbumin, and GAT. The sensitive subpopulation of GABAergic neurons is the rapidly firing interneurons that provide the perisomatic and axon hillock innervation of the pyramidal cells. Their NMDA receptors appear to be much more sensitive to antagonists than those less active GABAergic neurons and pyramidal cells. The subtly reduced GABAergic inhibition results in a disinhibition of the glutamatergic pyramidal output. This degradation of the inhibitory feedback could account for the cognitive 

========309========

deficits and negative symptoms in schizophrenia, and the disinhibited output also results in elevated subcortical dopamine release and psychosis. Thus, psychosis would be considered a downstream event resulting from a disruption in critical glutamatergic–GABAergic synaptic function in the cerebral cortex. 
Anxiety and Depression 
GABAergic dysfunction has been associated with anxiety disorders, especially panic disorder, as well as with MDD. Clinically, there is considerable co-morbidity between anxiety and affective disorders. Decreased levels of the GABAA receptor modulators, the three α-reduced neuroactive steroids, have been found both in plasma and in CSF in MDD. Effective treatment with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) increases the neurosteroid levels. In contrast, in patients suffering from panic disorder, the plasma neurosteroid levels were significantly elevated, perhaps as a compensatory mechanism. MRS has disclosed significant reductions in GABA levels in the anterior cingulate and in the basal ganglia of medicated patients with panic disorder. PET scanning reveals a highly selective reduction in benzodiazepine receptor sites bilaterally in the insular cortex in panic disorder. A genome-wide screen has shown significant linkage at 15q in a region containing GABAA receptor subunit genes and panic disorder. MRS reveals significant reductions in both GABA and glutamate/glutamine (Glx) in the prefrontal cortex in MDD. Postmortem studies indicate up-regulation of the GABAA receptor α1- and β3-subunits in the cerebral cortices of depressed patients who committed suicide, consistent with a reduction in GABAergic neurotransmission. The reduced levels of GABA in the occipital cortex in episodes of MDD normalized with effective treatment with SSRI or with ECT. 
Glutamatergic dysfunction has also been implicated in depression. NMDA receptor antagonists have antidepressant effects in several animal models of depression including forced swim, tail suspension, and learned helplessness. A single injection of ketamine provides protection from the induction of behavioral despair in rats for up to 10 days. Chronic treatment with antidepressants alters the expression of NMDA receptor subunits and decreases glycine receptor B binding. Several placebo-controlled clinical trials have shown that a single dose of ketamine can produce a rapid, substantial, and persistent reduction in symptoms in patients with MDD, especially those who have not responded to SSRI/SNRI treatment. 
Alcoholism 
Ethanol at concentrations associated with intoxication has a dual action of enhancing GABAergic receptor function and attenuating NMDA receptor function. The GABA receptor effects may be associated with the anxiolytic 

========310========

effects of ethanol. Persistent abuse and dependency on ethanol result in a downregulation of GABAA receptors and an upregulation of NMDA receptors such that acute discontinuation of ethanol results in a hyperexcitable state characterized by delirium tremens. Furthermore, supersensitive NMDA receptors in the context of thiamine deficiency may contribute to the excitotoxic neuron degeneration of Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome. 
Acamprosate is a derivative of homotaurine that was developed as an agent to reduce alcohol consumption, craving, and relapse in alcoholic patients, for which it exhibits moderate efficacy in clinical trials. Because of taurine’s resemblance to GABA, it was thought that acamprosate acted via GABAA receptors, but electrophysiological studies found little evidence to support this hypothesis. Subsequent studies demonstrated that it inhibited NMDA receptor responses in cortical slices and recombinant NMDA receptors. The precise mechanism whereby acamprosate alters NMDA receptor function, however, remains unclear. 
FAS is the most common preventable cause of mental retardation. Convincing evidence has been developed that the microcephaly associated with fetal alcohol exposure results from inhibition of NMDA receptor function, resulting in widespread neuronal apoptosis in the immature cortex. NMDA receptor activation is essential for immature neuronal survival and differentiation. 
REFERENCES 
Balu DT, Coyle JT. The NMDA receptor “glycine modulatory site” in schizophrenia: D-serine, glycine, and beyond. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2015;20:109–115. 
Bode A, Lynch JW. The impact of human hyperekplexia mutations on glycine receptor structure and function. Mol Brain. 2014;7:2. 
Coyle JT, Basu A, Benneyworth M, Balu D, Konopaske G. Glutamatergic synaptic dysregulation in schizophrenia: therapeutic implications. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2012;213:267–295. Dutertre S, Becker CM, Betz H. Inhibitory glycine receptors: an update. J Biol Chem. 2012;287:40216–40223. 
Gonzalez-Burgos G, Cho RY, Lewis DA. Alterations in cortical network oscillations and parvalbumin neurons in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 2015;77(12):1031–1040. 
Granger AJ, Nicoll RA. Expression mechanisms underlying long-term potentiation: a postsynaptic view, 10 years on. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013;369:2013–2036. Hirano T. Long-term depression and other synaptic plasticity in the cerebellum. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci. 2013;89:183–195. 
Jensen AA, Fahlke C, Bjørn-Yoshimoto WE, Bunch L. Excitatory amino acid transporters: recent insights into molecular mechanisms, novel modes of modulation and new therapeutic possibilities. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2015;20:116–123. 
Lisman JE, Coyle JT, Green RW, et al. Circuit-based framework for understanding neurotransmitter and risk gene interactions in schizophrenia. Trends Neurosci. 2008;31:234– 

========311========

242. 
Mathews DC, Zarate CA Jr. Current status of ketamine and related compounds for depression. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74:516–517. 
Michalon A, Bruns A, Risterucci C, et al. Chronic metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 inhibition corrects local alterations of brain activity and improves cognitive performance in fragile X mice. Biol Psychiatry. 2014;75:189–197. 
Moghaddam B, Krystal JH. Capturing the angel in “angel dust”: twenty years of translational neuroscience studies of NMDA receptor antagonists in animals and humans. Schizophr Bull. 2012;38:942–949. 
Price RB, Shungu DC, Mao X, et al. Amino acid neurotransmitters assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy: relationship to treatment resistance in major depressive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2009;65:792–800. 
Proctor WR, Diao L, Freund RK, Browning MD, Wu PH. Synaptic GABAergic and glutamatergic mechanisms underlying alcohol sensitivity in mouse hippocampal neurons. J Physiol. 2006;575:145–159. 
Rudolph U, Knoflach F. Beyond classical benzodiazepines: novel therapeutic potential of GABAA receptor subtypes. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011;10:685–697. 
Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature. 2014;511:421–427. 
Senter RK, Ghoshal A, Walker AG, et al. The role of mGlu receptors in hippocampal plasticity deficits in neurological and psychiatric disorders: implications for allosteric modulators as novel therapeutic strategies. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2016;14:455–473. 
Singewald N, Schmuckermair C, Whittle N, et al. Pharmacology of cognitive enhancers for exposure-based therapy of fear, anxiety and trauma-related disorders. Pharmacol Ther. 2015;149:150–190. 
Straub C, Tomita S. The regulation of glutamate receptor trafficking and function by TARPs and other transmembrane auxiliary subunits. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2012;22:488–495 
Swick TJ. Swick TJ. Treatment paradigms for cataplexy in narcolepsy: past, present, and future. Nat Sci Sleep. 2015;7:159–169. 
Zorumski CF, Paul SM, Izumi Y, Covey DF, Mennerick S. Neurosteroids, stress and depression: potential therapeutic opportunities. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2013;37:109–122. 
▲ 1.6 Neuropeptides: Biology, Regulation, and Role in Neuropsychiatric Disorders 
SHAUN P. BROTHERS, PH.D., LARRY JAMES YOUNG, PH.D., AND CHARLES B. NEMEROFF, M.D., PH.D. 
INTRODUCTION 
Neuropeptides are the most diverse class of signaling molecules in the CNS. Initially discovered for their role in the hypothalamic regulation of pituitary hormone secretion, peptides have been found to play a complex role in brain function over the last 35 years. Neuropeptides and their receptors are 

========312========

widely distributed throughout the CNS, where they exert an extraordinary array of direct or neuromodulatory effects, ranging from modulating neurotransmitter release and neuronal firing patterns to the regulation of emotionality and complex behaviors. Over 100 unique biologically active neuropeptides have been identified in the brain, a subset of which is presented in Table 1.6–1. Adding to the complexity of neuropeptide systems in the CNS, the actions of many peptides are mediated via multiple receptor subtypes localized in different brain regions. In fact, the discovery of new peptides and receptor subtypes has outpaced the current understanding of the roles of these peptides in normal or aberrant CNS function. Pharmacological, molecular, and genetic approaches are now leading the way in the understanding of the contribution of neuropeptide systems in psychiatric disorders. The first half of this chapter provides a general overview of neuropeptide biology, including their biosynthesis, distribution, and signaling. The second half of the chapter provides specific, detailed information for a select group of neuropeptides, with special relevance to behavior and psychiatric disorders. By definition, a neuropeptide is a chain of two or more amino acids linked by peptide bonds and differs from other proteins only in the length of the amino acid chain. Neuropeptides range in length from two (e.g., carnosine and anserine) to over 40 amino acids (e.g., CRF and urocortin). By convention, peptides greater than 90 amino acids in length (about 10,000 molecular weight) are considered proteins. The neuropeptides highlighted in detail in this chapter include thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), CRF, oxytocin (OT), arginine vasopressin (AVP), neurotensin (NT), and NPY. The structures of these neuropeptides are illustrated in Table 1.6–2 and are written using the single-letter amino acid code by convention from the amino terminus (NH2-) beginning on the left to the carboxyl terminus (- COOH) on the right. Of course, there are many other examples of neuropeptides of relevance to psychiatric disorders, and a brief discussion of some additional peptides of particular interest is also presented at the end of the chapter. A detailed discussion of all neuropeptide systems of potential relevance to psychiatry is beyond the scope of this chapter. TRH and CRF are hypothalamic hypophysiotropic hormones, which stimulate the release of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), respectively, from the anterior pituitary (adenohypophysis) into the bloodstream. OT and AVP are neurohypophysial peptides that are released directly into the bloodstream from the posterior pituitary (neurohypophysis) under specific physiological conditions. However, all of these above-mentioned peptides, including NT, also function in the CNS as neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, or neurohormones in ways that are often quite distinct and independent from their effects on peripheral endocrine systems. Neuropeptides have been implicated in the regulation of a variety of behavioral and physiological 

========313========

processes, including thermoregulation, food and water consumption, sex, sleep, locomotion, learning and memory, responses to stress and pain, emotion, and social cognition, to name a few. Involvement in such behavioral processes suggests that it is likely that neuropeptidergic systems contribute to the symptoms and behaviors exhibited in the major psychiatric disorders, including autism, schizophrenia, mood disorders, and anxiety. 
Table 1.6–1. 
Selected Neuropeptide Transmitters Adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) 
Angiotensin 
Apelin 
Atrial natriuretic peptide 
Bombesin 
Calcitonin 
Calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP) 
Cocaine and amphetamine regulated transcript (CART) Cholecystokinin (CCK) 
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) 
Dynorphin 
β-Endorphin 
Leu-enkephalin 
Met-enkephalin 
Galanin 
Gastrin 
Ghrelin 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
Growth hormone 
Growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH; GRF) Insulin 
Kisspeptin 
Motilin 
Neuropeptide S 
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) 
Neurotensin 
Neuromedin-N 
Nociceptin 
Orexin 
Oxytocin 
Pancreatic polypeptide 
Prolactin 
Secretin 
Somatostatin (SS; SRIF) 
Substance K 
Substance P 
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 
Urocortin (1, 2 and 3) 
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) 
Vasopressin (AVP; ADH) 

========314========

Table 1.6–2. 
Selected Neuropeptide Structures 
Name 
Thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH) Corticotropin-releasing factor 
(CRF) 
Arginine Vasopressin (AVP) Oxytocin (OT) 
Neurotensin (NT) 
Neuropeptide Y 
Amino Acid Sequence pE-H-P-NH2 
S-E-E-P-P-I-S-L-D-L-T-F-H-L-L-R-E-V-L-E-M-A-R-A-E-Q-L-A-Q-Q-A-H-S-N- 
R-K-L-M-E-I-I-NH2 
C-Y-I-Q-N-C-P-L-G-NH2 
C-Y-F-Q-N-C-P-R-G-NH2 
pE-L-Y-E-N-K-P-R-R-P-Y-I-L-OH 
Y-P-S-K-P-D-N-P-G-E-D-A-P-A-E-D-M-A-R-Y-Y-S-A-L-R-H-Y-I-N-L-I-T-R-Q- 
R-Y-NH2 
Note the cyclized glutamines at the N-terminals of TRH and NT indicate by pE-, the cysteine–cysteine disulfide bonds of AVP and OT, and the amidated carboxy-terminals of TRH, CRF, AVP, OT and NPY. 
Investigating Neuropeptide Function 
The roles of neuropeptides in CNS function and behavior have been examined using a multitude of experimental techniques. The levels of analysis include the following: molecular structure and biosynthesis of the peptide and its receptor(s), the neuroanatomical localization of the peptide and its receptor(s), the regulation of the expression and release of the peptide, and finally the behavioral effects of the peptide. The vast majority of information on neuropeptide biology is derived from laboratory animal studies; however, there is a growing database on the localization, activity, and potential psychiatric relevance of several neuropeptides systems in humans. 
Most neuropeptide structures have been identified based on chemical analysis of purified biologically active peptides, leading ultimately to the cloning and characterization of the genes encoding them. Characterization of the gene structure of peptides and their receptors has allowed for understanding of the molecular regulation of these systems, and their chromosomal localization is useful in genetic studies examining the potential roles of these genes in the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders. Structural characterization permits the production of immunological and molecular probes that are useful in determining peptide distribution and regulation in the brain. Quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) on microdissected brain regions or immunocytochemistry on brain sections is typically used to characterize the regional distribution of peptides throughout the brain. Both techniques use specific antibodies generated against the neuropeptide to detect its presence. Immunocytochemistry allows researchers to visualize the precise cellular localization of peptide-synthesizing cells as well as their projections throughout the brain, though the technique is generally not quantitative. 

========315========

Using molecular probes homologous to the mRNA encoding the peptides or receptor, in situ hybridization can be used to localize and quantify gene expression in brain sections. This is a powerful technique for examining the molecular regulation of neuropeptide synthesis with precise neuroanatomical resolution, which is impossible for other classes of nonpeptide neurotransmitters that are not derived directly from the translation of mRNAs, such as dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine. In addition to immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization, receptor autoradiography on brain sections (see Fig. 1.6–4) or “grind and bind” receptor-binding assays on microdissected brain tissue is frequently used to localize and quantify neuropeptide receptors in specific regions of the brain. Receptor autoradiography involves allowing a radiolabeled ligand to bind the receptor on a thin slice of tissue and then detecting the bound by visualizing it on x-ray film or other means. Other molecular techniques, such as Northern blot analysis, ribonuclease protection assay, and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR), are also commonly used to measure neuropeptide and receptor expression and regulation by quantifying the mRNAs encoding the peptide or receptor. However, quantification of neuropeptide gene expression or immunoreactivity within a cell or tissue homogenate does not provide information on neuropeptide release. In vivo microdialysis, in which peptide concentrated in the extracellular fluid is collected at sequential time intervals using dialysis probes implanted into specific brain regions, may be used to quantify neuropeptide release under defined physiological or behavioral circumstances. 
Generally, the behavioral effects of neuropeptides are initially investigated by infusions of the peptide directly into the brain. Unlike many nonpeptide neurotransmitters, most neuropeptides do not penetrate the BBB in amounts sufficient enough to produce CNS effects. Furthermore, serum and tissue enzymes tend to degrade the peptides before they reach their target sites. The degradation is usually the result of the cleavage of specific amino acid sequences targeted by a specific peptidase designed for that purpose. Thus, intracerebroventricular (ICV) or site-specific infusions of peptides in animal models are generally required to probe for behavioral effects of peptides. However, there are some examples of delivery of neuropeptides via intranasal infusions in human subjects, which in some cases appears to permit access of the peptide to the brain. 
In many cases, the interpretation of neuropeptide infusion studies is complicated because of the considerable cross-talk between specific neuropeptides and several heterologous receptors. For example, OT and vasopressin differ by only two of nine amino acids, and both peptides cross- react to some degree with both receptor types. In some cases, highly selective peptide-receptor synthetic agonists or antagonists have been developed that allow researchers to examine the role of specific 

========316========

neuropeptide receptors in the regulation of behavior or physiological processes. In addition, transgenic and knockout mouse approaches are becoming more and more commonly used approaches to investigate neuropeptide function. For example, mutant mouse strains with null mutations (knockouts) in either the peptide gene or the corresponding receptor have been developed and have proven quite useful for exploring the role of neuropeptides in behavioral processes. siRNA or short hairpin RNA (shRNA) techniques, which lead to selective degradation of the targeted mRNA in specific brain regions, have been used to examine the function of specific neuropeptide-producing neuronal populations. The CRISPR/Cas system has been used for gene editing and holds potential to begin to separate temporal effects of up/downregulating neuropeptides and genes. Similar efforts with viruses to selectively overexpress or knock down neuropeptide or receptor RNA in specific microinjected brain regions have been pursued as well. Most recently, there have been developments in optogenetics that, while still in the early stages of use, offer the potential to probe neuronal activity in living organisms. With optogenetics, LASER light is used to activate neuronal firing, which can provide special and temporal resolution of real-time neuronal activation in different models, and potentially in combination with the modulators and technologies described above. 
As noted above, one of the greatest impediments for exploring the role and potential therapeutic value of neuropeptides is the inability of the peptides or their peptidergic agonists/antagonists to penetrate the BBB. Thus, the behavioral effects of most peptides in humans are largely uninvestigated, with the exception of a few studies utilizing intranasal delivery. However, in some instances, small molecule nonpeptide agonists/antagonists have been developed that can be administered peripherally and permeate the BBB in sufficient quantities to affect receptor activation. 
Humans are less-than-ideal subjects for neuropeptide research for several reasons. First, although blood samples to determine plasma hormone concentrations are relatively easy to obtain, the independent regulation of peripheral and CNS peptide release, the high concentration of plasma peptidases, and the BBB make it virtually impossible to infer CNS peptide physiology from plasma hormone concentrations. Also, the use of biopsy to directly assess tissue peptide concentrations is not ideal because it is not routinely repeatable, is limited to superficial structures, and suffers from potential morbidity. In contrast, however, CSF has been shown to reflect extracellular fluid concentrations of several transmitter substances, is in direct contact with the CNS, is screened from peripheral serum sources by the BBB, and may be sampled across time. The limitations of human CSF studies include a lack of information about the regional CNS source of any changes in peptide concentration detected, the use of lumbar 

========317========

CSF, which is somewhat removed from higher forebrain CNS sources of peptides and subject to spinal cord peptide contributions, the potentially confounding effects of previous drug treatments or disease episodes, and the reluctance of research subjects to consent to this procedure. Postmortem tissue studies of neuropeptide concentration changes in psychiatric disease have been informative in many cases, but interpretation must include consideration of postmortem delay, previous drug treatment, and coexisting illnesses. Most of the data on alterations in CSF or tissue concentrations of neurotransmitters have been derived from comparisons between diagnostically defined psychiatric groups and control groups. However, the controls may be so-called “neurologic or psychiatric controls,” not healthy volunteers, and the accuracy and consistency of the diagnoses may be less than optimal. In addition, the etiology of a syndromal diagnosis may differ among subjects in the same diagnostic group. Even after matching for age, gender, or other demographic variables, heterogeneity among human research populations results in individual variations of absolute peptide values that are often quite wide. Such variances severely reduce the power of group comparisons to detect alterations in peptide concentrations. The use of pre- and posttreatment CSF samples, or of samples obtained during the active disease state versus when the patient is in remission, addresses some of the serious limitations in study design. For such progressive diseases as schizophrenia or Alzheimer disease, serial CSF samples may be a valuable indicator of disease progression or response to treatment. Even with these constraints, significant progress has been made in describing the effects of various psychiatric disease states on neuropeptide systems in the CNS. 
BIOSYNTHESIS 
Unlike other neurotransmitters, the biosynthesis of a neuropeptide involves transcription of an mRNA from a specific gene, translation of a polypeptide preprohormone encoded by that mRNA, and then posttranslational processing involving proteolytic cleavage of the preprohormone to yield the active neuropeptide. Over the past 30 years, the gene structures and biosynthetic pathways of many neuropeptides have been elucidated. The gene structure of selected neuropeptides is illustrated in Figure 1.6–1. Neuropeptide genes are generally composed of multiple exons that encode a protein preprohormone. The N-terminus of the preprohormone contains a signal peptide sequence, which guides the growing polypeptide to the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) membrane. The single preprohormone molecule often contains the sequences of multiple peptides that are subsequently separated by proteolytic cleavage by specific enzymes. For example, translation of the gene encoding NT yields a preprohormone, which upon enzymatic cleavage produces both NT and neuromedin-N. Other neuropeptide genes, such as 

========318========

the TRH gene, encode multiple copies of the peptide sequence or, as in the case of OT and vasopressin, also encode other proteins essential in the posttranslational processing and transport of the neuropeptide. The 
neuroanatomical 
localization 
and 
abundance 
of 
neuropeptides 
is 
determined primarily by the region-specific expression and regulation of its gene. Each neuropeptide gene is expressed in well-defined populations of neurons within the brain. The precise neuroanatomical pattern of peptide hormone gene expression is determined by regulatory DNA sequences surrounding the gene. This has been elegantly demonstrated for the OT gene. OT is expressed in a subset of magnocellular neurons in the PVN of the hypothalamus. Transgenic mice carrying the rat OT gene with the surrounding regulatory sequences expressed the rat OT transgene specifically in the mouse magnocellular oxytocinergic neurons. Smaller constructs lacking these regulatory regions did not result in the correct expression patterns in the brain. Transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) located in the promoter of the gene are also involved in the physiological regulation of peptide gene expression. Analysis of promoter sequences of peptide genes has provided insights into the molecular regulation of 
peptide biosynthesis. 
distribution. 
Prohormone 
are 
copackaged 
with 
the 
The mRNA encoding the preprohormone is translated by ribosomes associated with the RER and the growing polypeptide is translated into the cisternae of the RER, with the signal peptide anchored in the RER membrane. Once translated, the signal peptide of the preprohormone is cleaved by a signal endopeptidase, freeing the prohormone polypeptide. The prohormone is then shuttled to the Golgi apparatus, where packaging into granules or vesicles occurs. Proteolytic cleavage of the prohormone into the biologically active neuropeptide begins in the Golgi and continues in the granules. Production of biologically active neuropeptides from prohormones begins with cleavage at specific sites adjacent to the neuropeptide sequence by specific endopeptidases known as prohormone convertases. Prohormone convertases cleave generally at pairs of basic amino acids (e.g., Lys-Arg, Lys-Lys and Arg-Arg) flanking the neuropeptide sequence. There are at least seven prohormone convertases, each with unique properties including substrate specificity and neuroendocrine 
convertases 
prohormones in the granules at the Golgi apparatus. The substrate specificity and differential distribution of the prohormone convertases provide a mechanism by which different neuropeptides encoded by a single prohormone can be differentially produced in an active form. Following 
peptide 
exoproteolysis by carboxypeptidases and/or aminopeptidases in order to remove the residual basic residues on the carboxy- or amino-terminus of the peptide fragments. The synthesis and processing of neuropeptides is 
endopeptidase 
cleavage, 
the 
illustrated in Figure 1.6–2. 
fragments 
are 
subjected 
to 

========319========

FIGURE 1.6–1. Schematics illustrating the gene structure, preprohormone mRNA, and processed neuropeptides of TRH, CRF, OT, AVP, and NT. Boxed regions indicate the locations of the exons in the respective genes. Shaded or hatched regions indicate coding regions. Each preprohormone begins with a signal peptide sequence (SP). Black boxes indicate the location of the sequences encoding the neuropeptide. 
Although many known peptides are complete and biologically active when cleaved from the prohormone, many others are subjected to additional posttranslational processing. Certain peptides have a metabolically blocked carboxy terminus that is often amidated. A glycine residue in the prohormone sequence often acts as the amide donor, and in the case of TRH, is cleaved by a monooxygenase that is contained in secretory granules. TRH is further processed on the N-terminus, where glutamine is cyclized by a glutamylcyclase to yield a pyroglutamyl moiety. These alterations are usually effective in reducing susceptibility to 

========320========

degradation and are often required for biological activity, as is the case of TRH, which is rendered inactive when the C-terminal amide is removed by proline endopeptidase to generate the free-acid structure. Other posttranslational processing events for active peptides include glycosylation, phosphorylation, and the formation of disulfide bonds, which are often required for either biological activity or transport. Several neuropeptides, including OT and vasopressin, contain a cysteine–cysteine disulfide bond, resulting in cyclic peptide structures (see Table 1.6–2). 
FIGURE 1.6–2.The peptidergic neuron. The figure shows the main steps in the chain of events from the information stored in the DNA molecule to the peripherally detected peptide fragments. The DNA sequence in the nucleus is transcribed to the mRNA molecule for further transport to the endoplasmic reticulum, where a translation takes place to form a large precursor protein (preproprotein). That protein is prepared for axonal transport by packaging into neurosecretory vesicles, or granules within the Golgi complex. During transport, the precursor protein is processed by specific cleavage enzymes into active and inactive peptide fragments. After release, the peptides are further degraded into smaller peptide fragments or constituent amino acids. 
DISTRIBUTION AND REGULATION 
Although many neuropeptides were originally isolated from pituitary and peripheral tissues, the majority of neuropeptides were subsequently found to be widely distributed throughout the brain. The peptides involved in regulating pituitary secretion are concentrated in the hypothalamus. Hypothalamic releasing and release-inhibiting factors are produced in neurosecretory neurons adjacent to the third ventricle that send projections to the median eminence, where they release peptides into the hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal circulatory system. Peptides produced in these neurons are often subject to feedback regulation by the peripheral 

========321========

hormones that they regulate. For example, TRH regulates activity of the hypothalamic–pituitary–thyroid (HPT) axis and thyroid hormones negatively feedback on TRH gene expression. However, neuropeptide- expressing neurons and their projections are found in many other brain regions, including limbic structures, cerebral cortex, midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord. Neuropeptides are often colocalized and released with other neuropeptide or nonpeptide neurotransmitters, refuting the “one neuron–one transmitter” tenet. The colocalization of neuropeptides within classical neurotransmitter circuits suggests an interaction between these systems, and the modulation of monoamine neurotransmitter (e.g., norepinephrine) function by neuropeptides (e.g., NPY) is common and well established. Indeed, many neuropeptides are cotransmitted with nonpeptide neurotransmitters and serve to modulate neurotransmission of both the pre- and postsynaptic cells. These interactions have stimulated speculation concerning the involvement of neuropeptides in the underlying pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. 
NEUROPEPTIDE SIGNALING 
Neuropeptides may act as neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, or neurohormones. Neuropeptide neurotransmitters are typically released from axonal terminals into a synapse, where binding to neuropeptide receptors changes the postsynaptic membrane potential, either depolarizing or hyperpolarizing the cell. For classical neurotransmitters, this often involves direct modulation of voltage-gated ion channels. In contrast, neuropeptide neuromodulators and neurohormones do not directly affect the firing of the target cell itself, but may alter the response of the cell to other neurotransmitters through modulation of second messenger pathways. Neuropeptide release is not restricted to synapses or axon terminals but may occur throughout the axon or even from dendrites. Neuropeptides may also diffuse quite a distance from the release site to the target cell, which possesses the neuropeptide receptor, where it acts as a neurohormone. Such paracrine neuropeptide release can occur even from nonneuronal cell populations in the brain, such as glial cells. In fact, there are numerous examples of a mismatch between neuropeptide and neuropeptide receptor distribution in the brain. Neuropeptides are released by exocytosis of the granules in response to electrical or hormonal stimulation of the neuron containing the neuron. Stimulation results in an increase in intracellular calcium concentrations, which leads to the fusion of the peptidergic granules with the plasma membrane and expulsion of the peptide into the extracellular space. The cellular signaling of neuropeptides is mediated by specific neuropeptide receptors. Thus, understanding the neuropeptide receptor function is essential for understanding neuropeptide biology. Neuropeptide receptors have undergone the same process of discovery and characterization that receptors for other neurotransmitters 

========322========

have enjoyed. The vast majority of neuropeptide receptors are G-protein– coupled, seven transmembrane domain receptors (GPCR) belonging to the same family of proteins as the monoamine receptors. Each neuropeptide receptor is usually, but not always exclusively, coupled to one type of G protein (e.g., Gs, Gi, Gq). Receptors can also homo- and heterdimerize allowing multiple modes of action via a single receptor population, though this process is not well understood. Depending on the subtype of G protein with which the receptor interacts, receptor activation may result in the stimulation or inhibition of specific second messenger pathways. The most common types of receptor signaling pathways involve the activated G protein modulating the activity of either adenylate cyclase (e.g., Gs or Gi) or PLC (e.g., Gq). Stimulation of adenylate cyclase results in increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production in the cell, while stimulation of PLC results in increased diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3). These so-called “second messengers” then effect increases in intracellular calcium concentrations, activation of protein kinases, and ultimately a host of cellular responses including altered gene expression, altered membrane potential, or cellular degranulation. 
Many neuropeptides exert their effects through multiple different receptor subtypes, which have different affinities for the peptides and activate different second-messenger pathways. These receptor subtypes are typically differentially distributed throughout the brain. Furthermore, many receptors may be modulated by more than one neuropeptide. For example, there are three subtypes of the vasopressin receptor, the V1a, V1b, and V2 subtypes, with the V1a and V1b predominating in the brain, while the V2 is localized in the kidney. Each of these receptor subtypes exhibits a unique tissue distribution, interacts with different G proteins, and activates different second-messenger systems. Within the brain, there are remarkable species differences as well as individual variation in OT and V1a receptor distribution, which has been associated with intra- and interspecies variation in social behaviors. In addition, OT may stimulate vasopressin receptor subtypes, and vasopressin may stimulate the OT receptor. Likewise, the main two CRF receptors are differentially localized within the brain, and both receptors can be modulated by both CRF and urocortin I, making it difficult to ascertain the relative role of each receptor in CRF functioning. 
Many, if not perhaps all, neurotransmitters appear to be coreleased with at least one other neurotransmitter at the synapse. ATP, for example, can apparently be coreleased from all neuronal types, though the action of the molecule will vary according to biology of the postjunctional cell. This cotransmission certainly also occurs for neuropeptides. One of the first to be delineated, NPY is coreleased with norepinephrine from the same vesicles within cells to act simultaneously on the target cell. NPY can also 

========323========

act via feedback inhibition on the releasing cell to reduce signaling tone. In this instance, NPY appears to play a neuromodulatory role at the synapse, by controlling signal strength and acting as a shutoff switch. 
Other types of cotransmission can occur including differential release of transmitters and cotransmitters (e.g., via frequency modulated release), postjunctional and/or prejunctional targeting cotransmitters, synergistic versus inhibitory cotransmitters, and others. It is important to consider neuropeptides as cotransmitters in such systems because cotransmission has the potential to mediate or modulate the underlying disease pathophysiology. Using NPY as an example again, NPY is also cotransmitted with NE in the adrenals within the HPA axis. NPY appears to play an overall suppressive role in NE signaling within the adrenals, thus suppressing the stress response. It has been widely theorized that activation of NPY can ameliorate some of the stress associated with chronic stress disorders and drug abuse/alcoholism, where there is prolonged activation of the HPA axis and where stress is viewed as playing a major role in relapse and drug-seeking behaviors. 
Most, if not all, genes for neuropeptide receptors and ligands have been cloned and characterized, though some receptors called “orphan receptors” have as of yet unknown endogenous ligands. Similarly, some ligands, for example, “cocaine and amphetamine regulated transcript” (CART), are thought to signal via GPCRs, which remain to be identified. It is likely, however, that all known GPCRs and ligands will be “de-orphanized” within the next decade, as numerous efforts are underway to do so. Once the cDNA of the receptor has been isolated, it can be used to produce purified receptor protein for structural and functional studies. By mutating specific amino acids in the receptor structure and determining relative binding affinities of peptides with various amino acid substitutions, it is possible to elucidate the nature of the ligand–receptor interaction and to inform crystal structures of the receptors. This information facilitates the development of compounds that specifically modulate receptor function, including nonpeptide drugs, leading to the ability to manipulate peptide systems in ways that are currently enjoyed by the more classic neurotransmitters. The availability of cDNAs encoding the receptor also permits the neuroanatomical mapping of the receptor-producing cells in the brain by use of probes that target the mRNA of the receptor specifically, which is critical for understanding the neural circuits modulated by the peptide. Finally, with the cloned receptor in hand, it is possible to use transgenic techniques, such as targeted gene overexpression, or gene knockouts to further elucidate receptor function. siRNA, shRNA, and viral techniques now allow the targeted synthesis disruption of specific receptor populations, allowing researchers to examine the role of these receptor populations on physiology and behavior. 
The three factors that determine the biological role of a neuropeptide 

========324========

hormone are (i) the temporal-anatomical release of the peptide, (ii) functional coupling of the neuropeptide receptor to intracellular signaling pathways, and (iii) the cell type and circuits in which the receptor is expressed. Genetic studies have demonstrated that regulatory sequences flanking the receptor-coding region determine the expression pattern of the receptor, and thus the physiological and behavioral response to the neuropeptide. For example, mice and voles differ in the localization of AVP receptors in the brain, and they also differ in their behavioral response to AVP. However, when transgenic mice were created carrying the vole AVP receptor gene with the flanking regulatory sequences, the mice expressed the receptor in a pattern similar to that of the vole and then displayed behavioral responses to AVP similar to that of voles. This study suggests that polymorphisms in the regulatory region of a neuropeptide receptor gene could result in significant differences in neuropeptide function, and thus could potentially be relevant to psychiatric disorders. Many receptor genes have now been localized to specific chromosomal loci and are being examined in genetic studies for associations with psychiatric disorders. 
Historically, the inability to block specific neuropeptide signals pharmacologically has severely hindered research into the roles of the endogenous peptides in various behaviors and physiological effects. However, for many neuropeptide receptors, selective agonists and antagonists are now available, which have been extremely informative in preclinical studies to examine receptor function. As mentioned above, most of these compounds are derivatives of the peptide itself and therefore do not pass the BBB. More recently, a number of pharmaceutical companies, and even academic labs, have synthesized nonpeptidergic, lipophilic compounds that can permeate the BBB and may act as neuropeptide agonists or antagonists. The development of these types of compounds is essential for understanding the role of neuropeptide receptor function in human behavior and may also be useful in the development of PET radioligands to study receptor distribution in living human subjects. These compounds also hold promise as therapeutic agents in the treatment of certain psychiatric disorders. 
Peptidases 
Unlike monoamine neurotransmitters, peptides are not inactivated by being actively taken up by presynaptic nerve terminals. Rather, released peptides are degraded into smaller fragments, and eventually into single amino acids, by specific enzymes termed peptidases. The enzymes may be found bound to post- or presynaptic neural membranes or in solution in the cytoplasm and extracellular fluid, and they are distributed widely in peripheral organs, and serum, as well as in the CNS. As a result, neuropeptides generally have half-lives on the order of minutes once released. There are several general classes of peptidases, with several 

========325========

distinct enzymes in each class. Those classes include the serine endopeptidases containing such enzymes as trypsin and chymotrypsin; thiol peptidases, such as pyroglutamate amino peptidase and cathepsin B and C; acid proteases, such as pepsin and renin; metalloendopeptidases, such as neural endopeptidase and angiotensin-converting enzymes (ACEs); and metalloexopeptidases, such as aminopeptidases and carboxypeptidases such as enkephalin-convertase and carboxypeptidase A and B. These degradative enzymes are often the same as those used in processing but have different subcellular locations. An example is carboxypeptidase B, which cleaves the dibasic amino acid residues flanking the active peptide sequence in the prohormone during processing, or reduces activity at the receptor if the peptide contains dibasic amino acids in the active sequence, such as NT. Peptidases have pH and temperature optimums for activity and can be inhibited by various chemicals or chelators, or by amino acid substitution at vulnerable points in the peptide chain. Alterations in peptidase activity or concentration can contribute to alterations in the synaptic availability of a peptide, and the regulation of peptidase levels may be as exquisitely controlled as receptor number, and peptide synthesis and release. Cleavage of the actively released form of the peptide usually ends or significantly reduces biological activity, but examples abound of partial or complete receptor activation by partially metabolized peptides or their fragment. Peptidases offer yet another potential opportunity for the integration and regulation of neuropeptide transmitter actions and synaptic availability. As the present peptidase inhibitors are relatively nonspecific in their ability to inhibit various peptidases, there have been few attempts to influence peptide concentrations by pharmacological blockade of their associated peptidases. ACE inhibitors such as captopril and lisinopril are one exception to that generality. It is expected that second- and third-generation peptidase inhibitors, with discrete peptidase and possibly regional specificity, will be developed that eventually may allow the truly elegant manipulation of endogenous neuropeptide concentrations. 
SPECIFIC NEUROPEPTIDES AS PROTOTYPES OF NEUROPEPTIDE BIOLOGY Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone 
In 1969, TRH, a pyroglutamyl histidyl prolinamide tripeptide (Table 1.6– 2), became the first of the hypothalamic releasing hormones to be isolated and characterized, work that, in part, resulted in the Nobel prize for Drs. Andrew Schally and Roger Guillemin in 1977. The discovery of the structure of this hormone led to the conclusive demonstration that peptide hormones secreted from the hypothalamus regulate secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary. The gene for TRH in humans resides on chromosome 3q13.3-q21. In rats, it consists of three exons (coding regions) separated by 

========326========

two introns (noncoding regions) (Fig. 1.6–1). The first exon contains the 5′ untranslated region (UTR) of the mRNA encoding the TRH preprohormone, the second exon contains the signal peptide (SP) sequence and much of the remaining amino terminal-end of the precursor peptide, and the third contains the remainder of the sequence, including five copies of the TRH precursor sequence, the carboxy terminal region, and the 3′ UTR. The 5′ flanking region of the gene, or promoter, contains sequences homologous to the glucocorticoid receptor and the thyroid hormone receptor DNA-binding sites, providing a mechanism for the regulation of this gene by cortisol and negative feedback by thyroid hormone. Enzymatic processing of TRH begins with excision of the progenitor peptides by carboxypeptidases, amidation of the C-terminal proline and cyclization of the N-terminal glutamine, to yield five TRH molecules per prohormone molecule. TRH is widely distributed in the CNS, with TRH immunoreactive neurons being located in the olfactory bulbs, entorhinal cortices, hippocampus, extended amygdala, hypothalamus, and midbrain structures. As is the case for most neuropeptides, the TRH receptor is also a member of the seven-transmembrane domain, GPCR family. 
Hypothalamic TRH neurons project nerve terminals to the median eminence, where they release TRH into the hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal system, where it is transported to the adenohypophysis, causing the release of TSH into the systemic circulation. TSH subsequently stimulates the release of the thyroid hormones, triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), from the thyroid gland. TRH neurons in the PVN contain thyroid hormone receptors and respond to increases in thyroid hormone secretion with a decrease in TRH gene expression and synthesis. This negative feedback of thyroid hormones onto the TRH-synthesizing neurons was first demonstrated by a decrease in TRH content in the median eminence, but not in the PVN of the hypothalamus, after thyroidectomy. This effect can be reversed with exogenous thyroid hormone treatment. The treatment of normal rats with exogenous thyroid hormone decreases TRH concentration in the PVN and the posterior nucleus of the hypothalamus. Using a probe against the TRH preprohormone mRNA, in situ hybridization studies have demonstrated that TRH mRNA is increased in the PVN 14 days after thyroidectomy. The ability of thyroid hormones to regulate TRH mRNA can be superseded by other stimuli that activate the HPT axis. In that regard, repeated exposure to cold (which releases TRH from the median eminence) induces increases in the levels of TRH mRNA in the PVN despite concomitantly elevated concentrations of thyroid hormones. Further evidence of the different levels of communication of the HPT axis are seen in TRH’s ability to regulate the production of mRNA for the pituitary TRH receptor and for TRH concentrations to regulate the mRNA coding for both the α and β subunits of the thyrotropin (TSH) molecule. In addition, TRH- containing synaptic boutons have been observed in contact with TRH- 

========327========

containing cell bodies in the medial and periventricular subdivisions of the PVN, thus providing anatomical evidence for ultrashort feedback regulation of TRH release. Negative feedback by thyroid hormones may be limited to the hypothalamic TRH neurons because negative feedback on TRH synthesis by thyroid hormones has not been found in extrahypothalamic TRH neurons. 
The early availability of adequate tools to assess HPT axis function (i.e., radioimmunoassays, synthetic peptides), coupled with observations that primary hypothyroidism is associated with depressive symptomatology, ensured extensive investigation of the involvement of this axis in affective disorders. Early studies established the hypothalamic and extrahypothalamic distribution of TRH. This extrahypothalamic presence of TRH quickly led to speculation that TRH might function as a neurotransmitter or neuromodulator. Indeed, a large body of evidence supports such a role for TRH. Within the CNS, TRH is known to modulate several different neurotransmitters, including dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, and the opioids. TRH has been shown to arouse hibernating animals, and counteracts the behavioral response and hypothermia produced by a variety of CNS depressants including barbiturates and ethanol. 
Interest in putative CNS actions of TRH was stimulated by studies of the HPT axis and depression by Prange and colleagues. Three decades ago, it was hypothesized that thyroid function was integral to the pathogenesis of, and recovery from, affective disorders due to the numerous interactions among thyroid hormones, catecholamines, and adrenergic receptors in the CNS. Overall, these studies suggested a role for thyroid dysfunction in refractory depression and are consonant with clinical studies, suggesting the existence of an increased rate of hypothyroidism among patients with refractory depression. The use of TRH as a provocative agent for the assessment of HPT axis function evolved rapidly after its isolation and synthesis. Clinical use of a standardized TRH stimulation test, which measures negative feedback responses, revealed blunting of the TSH response in approximately 25 percent of euthyroid patients with major depression. These data have been widely confirmed. The observed TSH blunting in depressed patients does not appear to be the result of excessive negative feedback due to hyperthyroidism because thyroid measures such as basal plasma concentrations of TSH and thyroid hormones are generally in the normal range in these patients. It is possible that TSH blunting is a reflection of pituitary TRH receptor downregulation as a result of median eminence hypersecretion of endogenous TRH. Indeed, the observation that CSF TRH concentrations are elevated in depressed patients as compared to controls supports the hypothesis of TRH hypersecretion but does not elucidate the regional CNS origin of this tripeptide. In fact, TRH mRNA expression in the PVN of the hypothalamus is decreased in patients with 

========328========

major depression. However, it is not clear whether the altered HPT axis represents a causal mechanism underlying the symptoms of depression or simply a secondary effect of depression-associated alterations in other neural systems. 
Corticotropin-Releasing Factor and Urocortins 
In the 1950s, it was observed that pituitary extracts contained a factor, referred to as CRF, which could stimulate the release of ACTH from anterior pituitary cells in vivo. After a search spanning nearly three decades, Vale and colleagues isolated and characterized CRF as a 41-amino acid peptide in 1981. The gene for CRF in humans is located on chromosome 8q13 and is composed of 2 exons, with the CRF preprohormone being encoded entirely on exon 2 (Fig. 1.6–1). More recently, the related neuropeptides, urocortin 1, urocortin 2, and urocortin 3, have been identified and share similar gene structures. CRF is the primary hypothalamic ACTH secretagogue in most species, and it also functions as an extrahypothalamic neurotransmitter/neuromodulator in a CNS network which, along with the urocortins, globally coordinates responses to stressors. There is convincing evidence to support the hypothesis that CRF and the urocortins play a complex role in integrating the endocrine, autonomic, immunological, and behavioral responses of an organism to stress. 
Although it was originally isolated because of its functions in regulating the HPA axis, CRF is widely distributed throughout the brain. The PVN of the hypothalamus is the major site of CRF-containing cell bodies that influence anterior pituitary ACTH. These neurons originate in the parvocellular region of the PVN and send axon terminals to the median eminence, where CRF is released into the hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal system in response to stressful stimuli. A small group of PVN neurons also project to the brainstem and spinal cord, where they regulate autonomic aspects of the stress response. CRF-containing neurons are also found in other hypothalamic nuclei, the neocortex, the extended amygdala, brainstem, and spinal cord. Central CRF infusion into laboratory animals produces physiological changes and behavioral effects similar to those observed following stress, including increased locomotor activity, increased responsiveness to an acoustic startle, and decreased exploratory behavior in an open field. 
In a manner similar to that described for TRH and thyroid hormones, CRF gene expression and content in the PVN are negatively influenced by glucocorticoids (cortisol) and positively regulated by a wide variety of stressors. Adrenalectomy results in an increase in CRF mRNA expression in the PVN, and glucocorticoid replacement decreases CRF mRNA expression in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast to their effects in the PVN, glucocorticoids increase CRF mRNA content in the amygdala rather 

========329========

than decreasing it. 
CRF is also found in the raphe nuclei and the locus coeruleus (LC), the origin of the major serotonergic and noradrenergic projections to the forebrain, respectively, circuits long postulated to play a role in the pathophysiology of depression and anxiety. Increased anxiety observed after direct CNS administration of CRF has been hypothesized to be associated, in part, with increased noradrenergic activity. Stress has been shown to produce an increase in CRF content in the LC and a decrease in CRF concentrations in the median eminence (consistent with increased release). Other studies have shown that CRF-containing nerve terminals impinge upon noradrenergic neurons of the LC and that exogenous CRF applied to those neurons alters their firing rate. Some of the noradrenergic LC neurons, in turn, project to the hypothalamic PVN, where their input increases CRF synthesis and release. As CRF injection into the LC elicits fearful or anxious behavior, one could postulate that stress activates the CRF neurons terminating on the LC noradrenergic neurons, which then may, acting along with other inputs to the PVN, stimulate the stress- induced increased release of CRF from the median eminence. Another hypothesis that has been pursued in recent years is severe stress causes nucleus accumbens dopamine neurons to become insensitive to CRF, resulting in reduced dopamine release and increased anhedonia. Interestingly, adult animals exposed to maternal separation early in life, an animal model for early adverse childhood experiences and a very severe form of stress, exhibit elevated CRF concentrations in the LC, increased CRF mRNA expression, and exaggerated HPA axis responses to stress. 
The physiological and behavioral roles of the urocortins are less understood, but several studies suggest that urocortin 2 and 3 are anxiolytic and may dampen the stress response. This has led to the hypothesis that CRF and the urocortins act in opposition, but this is likely an oversimplification. Urocortin 1 is primarily synthesized in the Edinger– Westphal nucleus, lateral olivary nucleus, and supraoptic hypothalamic nucleus. Urocortin 2 is synthesized primarily in the hypothalamus, while urocortin 3 cell bodies are found more broadly in the extended amygdala, perifornical area, and preoptic area. 
The CRF system is further complicated by the fact that the effects of CRF and the urocortins are mediated by at least two receptor subtypes, CRF1- and CRF2-receptor (Fig. 1.6–3). The CRF1 receptor is abundantly expressed in the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, medial septum, and anterior pituitary, whereas the CRF2 receptor is predominantly found in the lateral septum, ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), and choroid plexus of rodents, but has considerable expression in the human cortex. The CRF1 receptor appears to be the predominant receptor mediating the effects of CRF in the stress response. The CRF1 receptor has 4- to 10-fold higher 

========330========

affinity for CRF than for urocortin 1, with very low affinity for the other urocortins. In contrast, the CRF2 receptor has a 40-fold higher affinity for the urocortins relative to CRF. Thus, the urocortins have been proposed to be the endogenous ligands for the CRF2 receptor, but little is known regarding their physiological role. As expected, CRF1 receptor knockout mice display decreased anxiety-like behavior, have an impaired stress response, and exhibit elevated CRF mRNA expression in the PVN due to a lack of glucocorticoid negative feedback. In contrast, CRF2 receptor knockout mice display increased anxiety-like behavior and are hypersensitive to stress. Hyperactivity of the HPA axis in major depression remains one of the most consistent findings in biological psychiatry. The reported HPA axis alterations in major depression include hypercortisolemia, resistance to dexamethasone suppression of cortisol secretion (a measure of negative feedback), blunted ACTH responses to intravenous CRF challenge, increased cortisol responses in the combined dexamethasone/CRF test, and elevated CSF CRF concentrations. The exact pathological mechanism(s) underlying HPA axis dysregulation in major depression and other affective disorders remains to be elucidated. 

========331========

FIGURE 1.6–3. Ligands and receptors of the corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) signaling network and their putative roles. The figure illustrates the complexity of the CRF system with 4 different ligands modulating two different receptors, each of which regulates divergent physiological processes. The thickness of the arrows represents the relative affinity of each ligand for the respective receptors. (Adapted from Nemeroff CB, Vale WW. The neurobiology of depression: inroads to treatment and new drug discovery. J Clin Psychiatry. 2005;66(Suppl 7):5–13.) 
Once the phenomenon of HPA axis hyperactivity in patients with major depression was established, many research groups utilized various provocative neuroendocrine challenge tests as a “window into the brain” in attempts to elucidate pathophysiological mechanisms. In normal subjects, the CRF stimulation test, using either rat/human or ovine CRF, yields robust ACTH, β-endorphin, β-lipotropin, and cortisol responses following 

========332========

intravenous or subcutaneous administration. However, in patients with major depression, blunting of ACTH or β-endorphin secretion with a normal cortisol response has been repeatedly reported. Patients with PTSD, 50 percent of whom also fulfill criteria for major depression, also show blunted ACTH secretion in response to a CRF challenge. Importantly, researchers have reported normalization of the ACTH response to CRF following clinical recovery from depression, suggesting that the blunted ACTH response, like dexamethasone nonsuppression, may be a state- marker for depression. Early-life stress apparently sensitizes the HPA axis and leads to a greater risk of developing depression later in life. Depressed women who were victims of childhood abuse exhibit an exaggerated ACTH and cortisol response to a psychosocial stressor, presumably due to CRF hypersecretion. Depressed men with a history of childhood abuse exhibit marked HPA axis hyperactivity in the combined dexamethasone/CRF test. 
Mechanistically, two hypotheses have been advanced to account for the ACTH blunting following exogenous CRF administration. The first hypothesis suggests that pituitary CRF receptor downregulation occurs as a result of hypothalamic CRF hypersecretion. The second hypothesis postulates altered sensitivity of the pituitary to glucocorticoid negative feedback. Substantial support has accumulated favoring the first hypothesis. However, neuroendocrine studies represent a secondary measure of CNS activity; the pituitary ACTH responses principally reflect the activity of hypothalamic CRF rather than that of the corticolimbic CRF circuits. The latter of the two are more likely to be involved in the pathophysiology of depression. A potentially more direct method for the evaluation of extrahypothalamic CRF tone may be obtained from measurements of CRF concentrations in the CSF. A marked dissociation between CSF and plasma neuropeptide concentrations has been described, thus indicating that neuropeptides are secreted directly into CSF from brain tissue as opposed to being derived from plasma-to-CSF transfer. Evidence that CSF CRF concentrations originate from extrahypothalamic CRF neurons has been obtained from studies in which CSF CRF concentrations were repeatedly measured over the course of the day. CSF CRF concentrations in rhesus monkeys do not appear to be entrained with pituitary–adrenal activity. The proximity of corticolimbic, brainstem, and spinal CRF neurons to the ventricular system of the brain suggests that these areas make substantial contributions to the CSF CRF pool. 
In a series of studies, significant elevations of CSF CRF concentrations in drug-free patients with major depression or following suicide have been demonstrated. Additionally, severity of depression appears to correlate significantly with CSF CRF concentrations in patients with anorexia nervosa, multiple sclerosis, and Huntington disease. The elevation of CSF CRF concentrations in patients with anorexia nervosa reverts to the normal range as these patients approach normal body weight. No alterations of 

========333========

CSF CRF concentrations have been reported in other psychiatric disorders including mania, panic disorder, and somatization disorders as compared to controls. It is now clear that patients with early-life trauma in the form of child abuse or neglect exhibit increased CSF CRF concentrations, as has now been demonstrated in patients with major depression, PTSD, and antisocial personality disorder. Of particular interest is the demonstration that the elevated CSF CRF concentrations in drug-free depressed patients are significantly decreased after successful treatment with ECT, indicating that CSF CRF concentrations, like hypercortisolemia, represent a state, rather than a trait, marker. Other studies have confirmed this normalization of CSF CRF concentrations following successful treatment with fluoxetine. One group demonstrated a significant reduction of elevated CSF CRF concentrations in 15 female patients with major depression, who remained depression-free for at least 6 months following antidepressant treatment as compared to little significant treatment effect on CSF CRF concentrations in 9 patients who relapsed in this 6-month period. This suggests that elevated or increasing CSF CRF concentrations during antidepressant treatment may be the harbinger of a poor response in major depression despite early symptomatic improvement. Interestingly, treatment of normal subjects with desipramine or, as noted above, of depressives with fluoxetine is associated with a reduction in CSF CRF concentrations. 
In preclinical studies, CRF hypersecretion is associated with CRF- receptor downregulation. Depression is a major determinant of suicide, with more than 50 percent of completed suicides accomplished by patients with major depression. If CRF hypersecretion is a characteristic of depression, evidence of related CRF-receptor downregulation should be evident in the CNS of depressed suicide victims. Indeed, in two studies, a marked decrease in the density of CRF receptors in the frontal cortex of suicide victims as compared to matched control samples was observed. 
If CRF hypersecretion is a factor in the pathophysiology of depression, then reducing or interfering with CRF neurotransmission might be an effective strategy to alleviate depressive symptoms. Over the past several years, a number of pharmaceutical companies have committed considerable effort to the development of small molecule CRF1 receptor antagonists that can effectively penetrate the BBB. Several compounds have been produced with reportedly promising drug-like characteristics. 
More than 20 clinical trials have been conducted or are currently underway on the effects of CRF receptor antagonists on mood and anxiety disorders. These clinical trials have been disappointing because of the lack of efficacy for CRF1 receptor antagonists in patients with major depression or generalized anxiety disorder. It is important to note that these studies have not used narrowly defined depressive patient subtypes such as psychotic, anxious, or atypical depression but instead have utilized a much 

========334========

broader DSM inclusion criterion. Considering the fact that there is overwhelming evidence that CRF is hypersecreted in depressed patients with a history of childhood abuse and neglect, a clinical trial of CRF receptor antagonists in this discrete subset of patients with major depression would be of considerable interest. Moreover, two studies have documented elevated CSF CRF concentrations in PTSD. 
Oxytocin and Vasopressin 
The vasopressor effects of posterior pituitary extracts were first described in 1895 and the potent extracts were named vasopressin. In 1953, OT became the first peptide hormone to have its structure elucidated and the first to be chemically synthesized, leading to the Nobel Prize in chemistry being award to Vincent du Vingeaud in 1955. The human OT and AVP genes are situated tandemly in a head-to-tail fashion on chromosome 20p13 separated by a several kilobase intergenic sequence (Fig. 1.6–1). Both peptides are cyclical nonapeptides containing a cysteine–cysteine disulfide bond and differ at only two amino acid residues (Table 1.6–2). Like the sequence homology of the peptides themselves, the genes for OT and AVP share a common structure, suggesting that the two hormones are derived from a single ancestral hormone as a result of a gene duplication event early in vertebrate evolution. The two genes are organized in a tail-to- tail orientation and the OT and AVP mRNA are transcribed from opposite DNA strands toward each other. Each gene consists of 3 exons, with the first exon encoding the 5′ UTR, and the translation initiation codon followed by the signal peptide sequence and the peptide hormone portion of the preprohormone. Exons 2 and 3 encode the neurophysin portion of the prohormone molecule. The AVP prohormone also contains a glycoprotein, copeptin, whose function is unclear but that has been suggested as a biomarker in a number of diseases. Neurophysin is thought to play a role in the posttranslational processing and transport of the peptides, and copeptin is thought to do the same. 
Oxytocin and vasopressin mRNAs are among the most abundant messages in the hypothalamus, being heavily concentrated in the magnocellular neurons of the paraventricular and the supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus, which send axonal projections to the neurohypophysis. These neurons produce all of the OT and AVP that is released into bloodstream, where these peptides act as hormones on peripheral targets. OT and AVP are generally synthesized in separate neurons within the hypothalamus. OT released from the pituitary is most often associated with functions associated with female reproduction, such as regulating uterine contractions during parturition and the milk ejection reflex during lactation. AVP, also known as antidiuretic hormone, regulates water retention in the kidney and vasoconstriction through interactions with vasopressin V2 and V1a receptor subtypes, respectively. AVP is released 

========335========

into the bloodstream from the neurohypophysis following a variety of stimuli including plasma osmolality, hypovolemia, hypertension, and hypoglycemia. The actions of OT are mediated via a single receptor subtype (OTR), which is distributed in the periphery and within the limbic CNS. In contrast to the OTR, there are three AVP receptor subtypes, V1a, V1b, and V2 receptors, each of which is G-protein–coupled, seven-transmembrane domain receptors. The V2 receptor is localized in the kidney and is not found in the brain. The V1a receptor is distributed widely in the CNS and is thought to mediate most of the behavioral effects of AVP. The V1b receptor is concentrated in the anterior pituitary and in the hippocampus. Although its function in the brain is largely unknown, V1b knockout mice display decreased aggression and altered social behaviors. 
Some parvocellular neurons in the PVN of the hypothalamus also project to the median eminence, where AVP is released into the portal system and delivered to the anterior pituitary. Through interactions with V1b receptors located on corticotrophs in the adenohypophysis, AVP acts to potentiate the effects of CRF on ACTH secretion. AVP is colocalized with CRF in the parvocellular neurons of the PVN. Given the link between HPA axis dysregulation and depression, recent attention has been given to the possible relationship between AVP secretion and psychiatric disorders. Although alterations in CSF AVP concentrations have been reported in patients with major depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, anorexia, and Alzheimer disease, the findings are not as consistent as for CRF and many discrepant reports have appeared. In a postmortem study, an increase in the number of paraventricular AVP neurons colocalized with CRF cells has been reported in depressed patients compared to controls. A selective, nonpeptide V1b receptor antagonist, SSR149415, was in development, but was discontinued in 2008 due to apparent lack of clinical efficacy. Microdialysis experiments have demonstrated that AVP is released within the CNS in response to stressful stimuli. 
In addition to the hypophyseal OT and AVP systems, magno- and parvocellular hypothalamic and extrahypothalamic neurons produce OT and AVP, and send projections to the forebrain and brainstem. The release of peptide from these neurons is generally independent of neurohypophysial release and it should be noted that OT and AVP released into the bloodstream do not re-enter the brain due to their inability to traverse the BBB. OT and AVP projections from the PVN to the brainstem regulate a host of autonomic functions. However, in the forebrain, these peptides are now known to regulate a number of processes, ranging from anxiety, learning, and memory to complex social behaviors. 
Central OT produces clear anxiolytic effects in animal models. This is particularly evident during lactation in rats, when OT results in a blunted behavioral and ACTH response to a stressful acoustic stimulus. In contrast, central AVP appears to exert anxiogenic effects. In animal models, OT has 

========336========

been most intensively studied for its role in facilitating specific, complex social behaviors. OT has been reported to facilitate female sexual behavior, increase social interest, and facilitate the onset of maternal behavior. For example, in parturient rats, the onset of maternal behavior is blocked by OT antagonists, whereas maternal behavior can be observed in virgin females after infusion of OT directly into the brain. Likewise, in sheep, mother–infant bonding is facilitated by OT infusions. Studies with OT knockout mice suggest that this peptide plays a specific role in the processing of socially salient stimuli. For example, OT knockout mice have normal nonsocial cognitive abilities but have a specific deficit in the ability to recognize previously encountered individuals, even though olfactory processing is intact. Studies in highly social, monogamous rodents suggest that OT is also involved in the formation of selective social attachments between mates. Furthermore, species differences in OT receptor expression pattern appear to correlate with species differences in social behavior in rodents. For example, monogamous prairie voles have high densities of OT receptors in the striatum, while nonmonogamous species do not (Fig. 1.6– 4). Behavioral pharmacological studies demonstrate that these ventral striatal receptors are critical for social bond formation. Ventral striatal OT receptors mediate social reward in mice. Studies in humans suggest that OT plays a similar role in regulating human social cognition. Polymorphisms in the human OT receptor gene predict face recognition abilities, and intranasal OT delivery causes men to rate their partner as more attractive and enhances ventral striatal activity in response to viewing the partner’s face. All of these findings have led to the hypothesis that OT is involved in the regulation of the social brain, suggesting that dysregulation of this peptide could potentially explain social deficits in certain psychiatric disorders such as autism. Several studies using intranasal delivery of OT now confirm that this neuropeptide modulates brain function and cognition in humans. For example, intranasal OT enhances trust in economic games and enhances the ability to infer the internal states of others for subtle affective facial expressions. Imaging studies reveal that intranasal OT reduced amygdala activation and reduced coupling of the amygdala to brainstem regions implicated in autonomic and behavioral manifestations of fear in response to fear-inducing visual stimuli. There is evidence that early-life experiences also alter the OT system because women with a history of childhood abuse or neglect exhibit reduced CSF OT concentrations and polymorphisms of the OTR have recently been shown to mediate vulnerability to depression and anxiety. OT dysfunction has also been implicated in ASDs. One study has reported decreased plasma OT concentrations in autistic patients and further suggested that this deficit may be due to alterations in the activities of the prohormone convertases responsible for cleaving OT into its active form. However, this observation must be interpreted cautiously because plasma OT levels are 

========337========

not necessarily an index of CNS concentrations. OT concentrations in the CSF of autistic patients have not yet been measured. Several studies have suggested that intranasal OT can improve several aspects of social cognition, including emotion recognition and social reciprocity, as well as enhance activation of the reward system in autistic subjects. The OT system is currently viewed as the most promising target for improving social cognition in psychiatric disorders; however, the efficacy of activating the OT system through intranasal OT administration is hindered by the necessity of delivering the poorly brain-penetrant OT peptide to the brain due to a lack of useful small molecule brain-penetrant OT activators. Extrahypothalamic AVP-producing neurons in the extended amygdala are sexually dimorphic, with males having many more AVP-expressing neurons than females. These neurons project through the ventral forebrain to the lateral septum where they form a dense plexus of AVP-containing fibers in males, much more so than in females. Castration diminishes this sex difference and androgen treatment re-establishes the sexually dimorphic pattern. Thus, extrahypothalamic AVP is predicted to be involved in the regulation of sex-specific behaviors in males. Vasopressin has been reported to modulate a variety of behaviors in males, including anxiety, aggression, affiliation, and social attachment, in several animal models. For example, infusion of AVP into the hamster brain stimulates territorial and aggressive behaviors within minutes of administration. Extending this observation to humans, one study reported that individuals with a history of violent tendencies have elevated levels of AVP in the CSF compared to nonviolent controls. 
One of the most intriguing features of the AVP system is the species specificity in the behavioral effects of AVP. Consistent with this observation, the neuroanatomical localization of V1a AVP receptors is highly species specific, often with little overlap between even closely related species. In fact, the specific behavioral role of AVP seems to be correlated with the localization of V1a receptors in specific brain regions. For example, AVP facilitates affiliation and social attachment in monogamous mammals. In the prairie vole, a monogamous rodent, AVP has been identified as the neurochemical trigger that stimulates pair bonding between the male and its mate. Comparisons among monogamous rodents and closely related nonmonogamous species have revealed that species differences in social organization are associated with species differences in receptor distribution within the brain. In several monogamous species, including the prairie vole, the vasopressin V1a receptor subtype is abundant in the mesolimbic dopamine reward pathway. In contrast, this region has few V1a receptors in the nonmonogamous, asocial montane vole (Fig. 1.6–4). Infusion of a V1a receptor antagonist directly into the ventral pallidum of the prairie vole completely blocks pair bonding. Thus, AVP released during mating facilitates social bonding by modulating the mesolimbic dopamine pathway 

========338========

in prairie voles, but cannot do so in nonmonogamous species because of the lack of receptors in that region. Molecular analysis of the V1a receptor genes of these different species has revealed DNA sequences in the promoter of the gene that may be responsible for the differential distribution of the receptor in the brain and thus the differences in behavioral patterns. This variability in distribution across species, along with the association between expression patterns and behavior, has led to the hypothesis that individual differences in receptor expression, due to individual variation in gene promoter elements, could potentially have important behavioral consequences in humans. In fact, three separate genetic association studies now have reported associations between polymorphisms in the V1aR promoter and ASD. Thus, dysregulation of AVP and/or its receptor may represent a risk factor that contributes to the social cognition deficits in autism. 
FIGURE 1.6–4. Oxytocin and vasopressin receptor distribution patterns in the brain are associated with social behavior. The upper panels depict receptor autoradiograms illustrating the localization of oxytocin receptor binding in the highly social and monogamous prairie vole (A) and the asocial montane vole (B). The lower panels illustrate vasopressin V1a binding in the monogamous prairie vole (C) and nonmonogamous montane vole (D). Note the high density of oxytocin receptor in the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) and V1a receptor binding in the ventral pallidum (VP) of the prairie vole but not the montane vole. These receptor populations are critical for social attachment in monogamous rodents. (Adapted from Young LJ and Wang ZX. The neurobiology of the social bond. Nature Neuroscience. 2004;7:1048–1054.) 
Neurotensin 

========339========

NT was isolated, based on its hypotensive properties, from bovine hypothalamus in 1973. The neurotensin-neuromedin N gene was originally cloned from canine ileal mucosa, and complementary deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA) probes constructed against this form were used to clone the rat gene. The rat gene contains four exon sequences separated by three introns and spans approximately 10.2 kilobases (Fig. 1.6–1). In rats, the neurotensin-neuromedin N sequence is contained in the fourth exon and the single copy of each peptide sequence is bounded and separated by Lys- Arg basic amino pairs. The human NT gene has been localized to chromosome 12 (12q21). In pheochromocytoma (PC-12) neurons in culture, the NT-neuromedin N gene is regulated by lithium, NGF, cAMP activators, and dexamethasone through their effects on a 5′ flanking promoter region. The distribution of the NT-neuromedin N mRNA is generally the same as described for NT-containing neuronal cell bodies, except in the hippocampus and subiculum, where few neurons stain immunohistochemically for NT and yet an abundance of the NT- neuromedin N mRNA is found. NT-producing cells are found in the midbrain (VTA and to a lesser extent the substantia nigra [SN]), ventral striatum, extended amygdala, lateral septum, and arcuate nucleus. The actions of NT are mediated by 3 receptors, the NT1, NT2, and NT3 receptor subtypes. The NT1 and NT2 receptors are seven-transmembrane, GPCRs, while NT3 is a Type I amino acid receptor with a single transmembrane domain and is located intracellularly. 
Although NT is found in a number of brain regions, it has been most thoroughly investigated in terms of its association with other neurotransmitter systems, particularly the mesolimbic dopamine system, and has gained interest in research on the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. There are several lines of evidence suggesting that NT and its receptors should be considered as potential targets for pharmacological intervention in this disorder. First, the NT system is positioned anatomically to modulate the neural circuits implicated in schizophrenia. Second, peripheral administration of antipsychotic drugs has been shown to consistently modulate NT systems. Third, there is evidence that central NT systems are altered in schizophrenic patients. 
Although likely other neurotransmitter systems are involved, one prevalent model of the pathophysiology of schizophrenia is over-activity of the mesolimbic dopamine system. Within the midbrain, NT-producing neurons are found in the VTA and SN. Within the VTA, NT is found in dense-core vesicles only in tyrosine-hydroxylase–positive staining cell bodies, indicating colocalization with dopamine. These NT-dopamine cells project to the prefrontal cortex, striatum, amygdala, and lateral septum. A subset of those NT-dopamine cells projecting from the VTA to the prefrontal cortex also produces CCK. In contrast to the VTA, the NT- 

========340========

producing cells in the SN are tyrosine hydroxylase negative. In addition to the NT-producing cells, dense fibers in the VTA, staining positive for NT and originating from projections from the forebrain, do not contain tyrosine hydroxylase. The midbrain also expresses NT receptors, with the vast majority of NT-receptor-containing neurons in the VTA being dopamine-positive neurons. NT producing cells, fibers, and NT receptors are also located in the ventral striatum. Thus, NT is colocalized with DA in the mesolimbic dopamine system, and this system is, in turn, sensitive to NT modulation due to the presence of the NT receptors. 
NT was first shown to interact with dopamine systems while undergoing characterization of its potent hypothermic and sedative-potentiating activity. Subsequent work indicated that NT possessed many properties that were also shared by antipsychotic drugs, including the ability to inhibit avoidance, but not escape, responding in a conditioned active avoidance task; the ability to block the effects of indirect dopamine agonists or endogenous dopamine in the production of locomotor behavior; and the ability to elicit increases in dopamine release and turnover. Perhaps most importantly, both antipsychotic drugs and NT neurotransmission enhance sensorimotor gating. Sensorimotor gating is the ability to screen or filter relevant sensory input, deficits that may lead to an involuntary flooding of indifferent sensory data. Increasing evidence suggests that deficits in sensorimotor gating are a cardinal feature of schizophrenia. Both dopamine agonists and NT antagonists disrupt performance on tasks designed to gauge sensorimotor gating. Unlike antipsychotic drugs, NT is not able to displace dopamine from its receptor. As noted above, NT is colocalized in certain subsets of dopamine neurons and is coreleased with dopamine in the mesolimbic and medial prefrontal cortical dopamine terminal regions that are implicated as the site of dopamine dysregulation in schizophrenia. Antipsychotic drugs that act at dopamine D2 and D4 receptors increase the synthesis, concentration, and release of NT in those dopamine terminal regions but not in others. That effect of antipsychotic drugs in increasing NT concentrations persists after months of treatment and is accompanied by the expected increase in NT mRNA concentrations, as well as expression of the “immediate early gene” c-fos within hours of initial drug treatment. The altered regulation of NT expression by antipsychotic drugs apparently extends to the peptidases that degrade the peptide because reports have revealed decreased NT metabolism in rat brain slices 24 hours after the acute administration of haloperidol. 
While NT is certainly important in schizophrenia, there are numerous other neuropeptides implicated as well. For example, cortical neuropeptides that localize to parvalbumin positive cells, such as somatostatin and CCK, may play a role as well. These cells express parvalbumin calcium binding protein and coordinate cortical GABA release. Coordinated GABA release is central to the generation of gamma 

========341========

wave rhythmicity. In schizophrenics, gamma oscillations appear to be impaired owing to dysfunctional inhibitory GABA circuits. Neuropeptides such as somatostatin and CCK are also released from GABAergic Martinotti and basket cells, respectively, and contribute to gamma oscillation frequency. Both peptides are also reduced in schizophrenia, and likely contribute to the disease state and represent attractive targets for potential therapies for this disease. 
With regard to schizophrenia, decreased CSF NT concentrations have been reported in several populations of patients when compared to controls or other psychiatric disorders. Although treatment with antipsychotic drugs has been observed to increase NT concentrations in the CSF, it is not known whether this increase is causal or merely accompanies the decrease in psychotic symptoms seen with successful treatment. Postmortem studies have shown an increase in NT concentrations in the dopamine-rich Brodmann’s area 32 of the frontal cortex, but that result may have been confounded by premortem antipsychotic treatment. Other researchers have found no postmortem alterations in NT concentrations of a wide sampling of subcortical regions. Decreases in NT receptor densities in the entorhinal cortex have been reported in postmortem samples of schizophrenic patients. A critical test of the hypothesis that NT acts as an endogenous antipsychotic-like substance awaits the development of an NT receptor agonist that can penetrate the BBB. 
Other Neuropeptides 
A number of other neuropeptides have been implicated in the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. These include CCK, substance P (SP), and NPY, though numerous others are implicated, far too many to cover in this chapter. A brief overview of the potential involvement of CCK, SP, and NPY neuropeptides in psychiatric disorders are provided as exemplars. 
CCK was originally discovered in the gastrointestinal tract and its receptor are found in areas of the brain associated with emotion, motivation, and sensory processing (e.g., cortex, striatum, hypothalamus, hippocampus, and amygdala). CCK is often colocalized with dopamine in the VTA neurons that comprise the mesolimbic and mesocortical dopamine circuits. Like NT, CCK decreases dopamine release. Infusions of a CCK fragment have been reported to induce panic in healthy individuals, and patients with panic disorder exhibit increased sensitivity to the CCK fragment compared to normal controls. Pentagastrin, a synthetic CCK agonist, dose-dependently produced increased blood pressure, pulse, HPA activation, and physical symptoms of panic. Recently, a CCK receptor gene polymorphism has been associated with panic disorder. 
The undecapeptide substance P is localized in the amygdala, hypothalamus, periaqueductal gray, LC, and parabrachial nucleus, and is 

========342========

colocalized with norepinephrine and serotonin. Substance P serves as a pain neurotransmitter, and administration to animals elicits behavioral and cardiovascular effects resembling the stress response. More recent data suggest a role for substance P in major depression and PTSD. Both depressed and PTSD patients exhibit elevated CSF substance P concentrations. Furthermore, in PTSD patients, marked increases in CSF substance P were detected following precipitation of PTSD symptoms. One study has indicated that a substance P receptor (termed the neurokinin 1 or NK1 receptor) antagonist capable of passing the BBB is more effective than placebo, and as effective as paroxetine in patients with major depression with moderate-to-severe symptom severity, though subsequent studies failed to confirm these findings, including in patients with PTSD and/or comorbid alcohol use. 
NPY is a 36 amino acid peptide found in the hypothalamus, brain stem, spinal cord, and several limbic structures, and is involved in the regulation of appetite, reward, anxiety, and energy balance. NPY is colocalized with serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons, and is thought to facilitate the containment of negative effects following exposure to stress. Suicide victims with a diagnosis of major depression have been reported to exhibit a pronounced reduction in NPY levels in the frontal cortex and caudate nucleus. Furthermore, CSF NPY levels are decreased in depressed patients. Chronic administration of antidepressant drugs increases NPY concentrations in the neocortex and hippocampus in rats. Plasma NPY levels were found to be elevated in soldiers subjected to the “uncontrollable stress” of interrogation, and NPY levels were correlated with feeling of dominance and confidence during stress. Additionally, low NPY response to stress has been associated with increased vulnerability to depression and PTSD. Remarkably, only a few scattered efforts have focused on developing NPY receptor modulators for psychiatric purposes. Although NPY itself is an anxiolytic-like substance, a synthetic compound that blocks the Y2 receptor will likely also be an anxiolytic because the NPY-Y2 receptor (Y2R) is located presynaptically and negatively regulates NPY release in the brain. Consistent with this hypothesis, Y2R null mice have reduced anxiety-like behavior. There are currently only two small molecule NPY Y2 receptor antagonists, and both are in preclinical development, thus this hypothesis remains to be tested in humans. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The current understanding of the role of neuropeptide systems in psychiatric disorders is derived primarily from correlational studies in human samples (e.g., CSF peptide concentrations or postmortem analyses), which preclude inferences of causality, or from animal models, which may or may not accurately reflect psychopathology. The inability to directly modulate CNS neuropeptide receptor activity in human subjects is a major 

========343========

impediment to the direct examination of the role of neuropeptide systems in human psychopathology. Considerable effort is being devoted to the development of small molecule nonpeptide drugs that readily pass the BBB and selectively modulate CNS peptide receptor activity. Small molecule agonists or antagonists for several neuropeptide systems, including CRF, OT, AVP, orexin and substance P, are the subject of preclinical and clinical investigations. Over the next decade, these new pharmacological tools will likely contribute significantly to the general understanding of the roles of these peptides in both normal human behavior and various psychopathologies. Small molecule drugs targeting neuropeptide receptors will undoubtedly lead to novel pharmacotherapy approaches for the treatment of psychiatric disorders such as anxiety disorders, depression, and ASDs. Small molecule agonists or antagonists will also likely lead to the development of novel PET ligands, allowing visualization of peptide receptors in the CNS of human subjects, a great unmet need. 
In addition to drug development and novel brain imaging tools, advances in psychiatric genetics are likely to reveal novel relationships between neuropeptide systems and psychopathology over the next few years. Polymorphisms in several neuropeptide receptor systems have already been implicated as risk factors in psychiatric disorders. Combining brain imaging techniques with genetic analyses will aid in understanding how these polymorphisms affect brain functioning. The plethora of recent GWAS studies in patients with mood and anxiety disorders, and schizophrenia will likely identify novel neuropeptides associated with disease vulnerability. Finally, psychopharmacogenomics, which examines how genotype influences clinical responses to drugs, may lead to individualized therapies targeting peptide systems based on the patient’s genotype. This burgeoning field has been helped along with technology to be able to fully sequence a patient genome in a few days time, but still needs to be broadly informed by examining patient cohorts in order to identify relevant genotypes. 
Clearly, the complexity of the brain’s rich neuropeptide systems and their contribution to mental health are just beginning to be understood. This area of research will continue to provide novel insights into the biological basis of psychopathology over the next few decades and will likely produce the next generation of pharmacological interventions for psychiatric disorders. 
REFERENCES 
Alhajji L, Nemeroff CB. Personalized medicine and mood disorders. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2015;38(3):395–403. 
Andari E, Duhamel JR, Zalla T, Herbrecht E, Leboyer M, Sirigu A. Promoting social behavior with oxytocin in high-functioning autism spectrum disorders. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2010;107(9):4389–4394. 

========344========

Binder EB, Nemeroff CB. The CRF system, stress, depression and anxiety-insights from human genetic studies. Mol Psychiatry. 2010;15(6):574–588. 
Block SG, Nemeroff CB. Emerging antidepressants to treat major depressive disorder. Asian J Psychiatr. 2014;12:7–16. 
Boules MM, Fredrickson P, Muehlmann AM, Richelson E. Elucidating the role of neurotensin in the pathophysiology and management of major mental disorders. Behav Sci (Basel). 2014;4(2):125–153. 
Brothers SP, Saldanha SA, Spicer TP, et al. Selective and brain penetrant neuropeptide y y2 receptor antagonists discovered by whole-cell high-throughput screening. Mol Pharmacol. 2010;77(1):46–57. 
Brothers SP, Wahlestedt C. Therapeutic potential of neuropeptide Y (NPY) receptor ligands. EMBO Mol Med. 2010;2(11):429–439. 
Bunevicius R. Thyroid disorders in mental patients. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2009;22(4):391–395. Caceda R, Kinkead B, Nemeroff CB. Involvement of neuropeptide systems in schizophrenia: human studies. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2007;78:327–376. 
Coccaro EF, Lee R, Owens MJ, Kinkead B, Nemeroff CB. Cerebrospinal fluid substance P-like immunoreactivity correlates with aggression in personality disordered subjects. Biol Psychiatry. 2012;72(3):238–243. 
Donaldson ZR, Young LJ. Oxytocin, vasopressin, and the neurogenetics of sociality. Science. 2008;322(5903):900–904. 
Fliers E, Kalsbeek A, Boelen A. Beyond the fixed setpoint of the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis. Eur J Endocrinol. 2014;171(5):R197–208. 
Gordon I, Vander Wyk BC, Bennett RH, et al. Oxytocin enhances brain function in children with autism. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2013;110(52):20953–20958. 
Green JJ, Hollander E. Autism and oxytocin: new developments in translational approaches to therapeutics. Neurotherapeutics. 2010;7(3):250–257. 
Griebel G, Holsboer F. Neuropeptide receptor ligands as drugs for psychiatric diseases: the end of the beginning? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2012;11(6):462–478. 
Johnson ZV, Young LJ. Neurobiological mechanisms of social attachment and pair bonding. Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2015:3:38–44. 
Kamath J, Yarbrough GG, Prange AJ, Jr, Winokur A. The thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)- immune system homeostatic hypothesis. Pharmacol Ther. 2009;121(1):20–28. 
Lemos JC, Wanat MJ, Smith JS, et al. Severe stress switches CRF action in the nucleus accumbens from appetitive to aversive. Nature. 2012;490(7420):402–406. 
Myers AJ, Williams L, Gatt JM, et al. Variation in the oxytocin receptor gene is associated with increased risk for anxiety, stress and depression in individuals with a history of exposure to early life stress. J Psychiatr Res. 2014;59:93–100. 
Neumann ID, Landgraf R. Balance of brain oxytocin and vasopressin: implications for anxiety, depression, and social behaviors. Trends Neurosci. 2012;35(11):649–659. 
Rilling JK, Young LJ. The biology of mammalian parenting and its effect on offspring social development. Science. 2014;345(6198):771–776. 
Ross HE, Young LJ. Oxytocin and the neural mechanisms regulating social cognition and affiliative behavior. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2009;30(4):534–547. 

========345========

Scheele D, Wille A, Kendrick KM, et al. Oxytocin enhances brain reward system responses in men viewing the face of their female partner. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110(50):20308– 20313. 
Skuse DH, Lori A, Cubells JF, et al. Common polymorphism in the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) is associated with human social recognition skills. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2014;111(5):1987–1992. 
Strand FL. Neuropeptides: general characteristics and neuropharmaceutical potential in treating CNS disorders. Prog Drug Res. 2003;61:1–37. 
Watanabe T, Abe O, Kuwabara H, et al. Mitigation of sociocommunicational deficits of autism through oxytocin-induced recovery of medial prefrontal activity: a randomized trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71(2):166–175. 
Young LJ. Oxytocin, social cognition and psychiatry. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015;40(1):243–244. 
Young LJ, Barrett CE. Neuroscience. Can oxytocin treat autism? Science. 2015;347(6224):825– 826. 
▲ 1.7 Neurotrophic Factors 
FRANCIS S. LEE, M.D., PH.D., AND MOSES V. CHAO, PH.D. 
Neurotrophins are a unique family of polypeptide growth factors that influence the proliferation, differentiation, survival, and death of neuronal and nonneuronal cells. The effects of neurotrophins depend upon their levels of availability, their affinity of binding to transmembrane receptors, and the downstream signaling cascades that are stimulated after receptor activation. While the biological roles for neurotrophins were initially characterized during development of the nervous system, it is now clear that they have multiple roles in the adult nervous system, such as regulating synaptic connections, synapse structure, neurotransmitter release, LTP, mechanosensation, pain, and synaptic plasticity. Alterations in neurotrophin levels have been implicated in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer disease and Huntington disease (HD), and as well as psychiatric disorders such as anxiety disorders, depression, and substance abuse. These recent insights provide new approaches to understanding the etiology and treatment of psychiatric disorders. 
THE NEUROTROPHIN FAMILY 
A large number of polypeptide factors affect the survival, growth, and differentiation of the nervous system. The neurotrophins, comprising of NGF, BDNF, NT-3, neurotrophin-4 (NT-4), are best understood and most widely expressed in the nervous system. The neurotrophins are initially synthesized as precursors or proneurotrophins that are cleaved to release the mature, active proteins. The mature proteins, approximately 12 to 14 

========346========

kDa in size, form stable, noncovalent dimers and are normally expressed at very low levels during development. Proneurotrophins are cleaved intracellularly by furin or proconvertases utilizing a highly conserved dibasic amino acid cleavage site to release carboxy-terminal mature proteins or extracellularly by plasmin or by matrix metalloproteases. 
The mature proteins mediate neurotrophin actions by selectively binding to members of the tropomyosin-related kinase (Trk) family of receptor tyrosine kinases to regulate neuronal survival, differentiation, and synaptic plasticity. In addition, all mature neurotrophins interact with p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), which can modulate the affinity of Trk neurotrophin associations. NGF was the first identified neurotrophic factor, and has a restricted distribution. In the PNS, it acts on sympathetic neurons, as well as sensory neurons involved in nociception and temperature sensation. In the CNS, NGF promotes the survival and functioning of cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain. These neurons project to the hippocampus and are believed to be important for memory processes, which are particularly affected in Alzheimer disease. The other neurotrophins are more widely expressed in the CNS. BDNF and NT-3 are highly expressed in cortical and hippocampal structures, and have been linked to the survival and functioning of multiple neuronal populations. 
NEUROTROPHIN RECEPTORS 
Neurotrophins are unique in exerting their cellular effects through the actions of two different receptors: the Trk receptor tyrosine kinase and p75NTR, a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily. Trk receptors consist of an extracellular ligand-binding region, a single transmembrane domain, and a highly conserved intracellular tyrosine kinase domain. The p75NTR receptor consists of an extracellular ligand- binding region, a single transmembrane domain, and an intracellular portion containing a protein-association region termed the death domain (Fig. 1.7–1). All neurotrophins bind to the p75 receptor. There are three vertebrate trk receptor genes: trkA, trkB, and trkC. All Trk receptors exhibit high conservation in their intracellular domains, including the catalytic tyrosine kinase domain and the juxtamembrane domain. The Trk receptors also exhibit a number of truncated isoforms. There are no sequence similarities between Trk and p75 receptors in their either ligand- binding or cytoplasmic domains. 
Neurotrophins bind as dimers to Trk family members, leading to receptor dimerization and activation of the catalytic tyrosine protein kinase domains. The dimerized Trk receptors autophosphorylate several key intracellular tyrosine residues, which rapidly initiate intracellular signaling cascades. This is accomplished by the phosphorylated tyrosines on the receptor acting as recognition sites for the binding of specific adaptor proteins that contain phosphotyrosine-binding motifs such as Src 

========347========

homology domain 2 (SH2). In particular, the Shc adaptor protein links the activated Trk receptor to two separate intracellular signaling pathways that mediate the majority of the biological effects of neurotrophins. 
FIGURE 1.7–1. Neurotrophin receptor signaling. Neurotrophins bind to Trk tyrosine kinase receptors (right) and p75 neurotrophin receptors (p75NTR) (middle). Trk receptors mediate differentiation and survival signaling through mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3-K), and phospholipase C-γ (PLC-γ) pathways, which lead to effects on transcription factors, such as the cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element–binding protein (CREB). Trk receptors contain IgG domains for ligand binding and a catalytic tyrosine kinase sequence (left) in the intracellular domain. p75NTR mediates apoptotic and cell migration responses through nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) and c- Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathways. The extracellular part of p75NTR contains four cysteine-rich repeats; the intracellular domain contains a death domain (middle). Interactions between Trk and p75NTR receptors can lead to changes in binding affinity for neurotrophin (right). 
The primary survival pathway involves Shc, linking Trk receptor activation to increases in phosphotidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3-K) activity. This in turn activates another protein kinase, Akt (protein kinase B), which has multiple effects on the cell’s apoptotic pathways. Also, Shc phosphorylation by Trk receptor activation leads to increases in Ras and MAP kinase activities. These events in turn influence transcriptional events such as the induction of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element–binding protein (CREB) transcription factor. CREB produces a multitude of effects on the cell cycle, neurite outgrowth, and synaptic plasticity. In addition, phospholipase-C-γ (PLC-γ) binds to activated Trk receptors and initiates an intracellular signaling cascade release of inositol phosphates and activation of protein kinase C (PKC). Trk receptor activation leads to a multitude of downstream signaling events, leading to 

========348========

changes in transcriptional programs. 
NGF binds most specifically to TrkA, BDNF and NT-4 to TrkB, and NT- 3 to TrkC receptors. The p75NTR receptor can bind to each neurotrophin but has the additional capability of regulating a Trk’s affinity for its cognate ligand. Trk and p75NTR receptors have been referred to as high- and low- affinity receptors, respectively. However, this is not correct since TrkA and TrkB actually bind mature neurotrophins with an affinity of 10−9 to 10−10 M, which is lower than the high-affinity site (Kd = 10−11 M). Also, the precursor form of NGF displays high-affinity binding to p75NTR. Trk- mediated responsiveness to low concentrations of NGF is dependent upon the relative levels of p75NTR and TrkA receptors and their combined ability to form high-affinity sites. This is important since the ratio of receptors can determine responsiveness and ultimately neuronal cell numbers. 
Although p75 and Trk receptors do not bind to each other directly, there is evidence that complexes form between the two receptors. Perhaps as a result of these interactions, increased ligand selectivity can be conferred onto Trk receptors by the p75 receptor. One way of generating specificity is by imparting greater discrimination of ligands for the Trk receptors (Fig. 1.7–2). For example, BDNF, NT-3, and NT-4/5 can each bind to the TrkB receptor, but in the presence of p75, only BDNF provides a functional response. Likewise, NGF and NT-3 both can bind to TrkA, but p75 restricts the signaling of TrkA to NGF and not to NT-3 (Fig. 1.7–2). Hence, p75 and Trk receptors interact in order to provide greater discrimination among different neurotrophins. 

========349========

FIGURE 1.7–2. Neurotrophin-binding specifities. All neurotrophins bind to p75 neurotrophin receptors (p75NTR). Neurotrophins bind selectively to specific tropomyosin- related kinase (Trk) receptors, and this specificity can be altered by p75NTR. Several neurotrophins, neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) and neurotrophin-4 (NT-4), can bind to multiple Trk receptors. BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; NGF, nerve growth factor. 
NEUROTROPHIC FACTORS AND DEVELOPMENT 
The formation of the vertebrate nervous system is characterized by widespread programmed cell death, which determines cell number and appropriate target innervation during development. Neurotrophins are highly expressed during early development and have been shown to be essential for the survival of selective populations of neurons during different developmental periods. The neurotrophic hypothesis provides a functional explanation for the role of neurotrophic factors in the development of the nervous system (Fig. 1.7–3). During development, neurons approaching the same final target vie for limited amounts of target-derived neurotrophic factors. In this way, the nervous system molds itself to maintain only the most competitive and appropriate connections. Competition among neurons for limiting amounts of neurotrophin molecules produced by target cells accounts for selective cell survival (Fig. 

========350========

1.7–3). Two predictions emanate from this hypothesis. First, the efficacy of neuronal survival will depend upon the amounts of trophic factors produced during development. Second, specific receptor expression in responsive cell populations will dictate neuronal responsiveness. 
On one level, neurotrophins fit well with the neurotrophic hypothesis, as many peripheral neuronal subpopulations depend on a specific neurotrophin during the period of naturally occurring cell death. In the CNS, the overlapping expression of multiple neurotrophin receptors and their cognate ligands allows for more diverse connectivity, which extends well into adulthood. In addition, it is clear now that neurons can release neurotrophins that act on themselves (autocrine transmission) or can be anterogradely transported down axons and act on neighboring neurons. Also, glial cells can release neurotrophins that act upon neurons in a paracrine fashion. In the periphery, neurotrophin retrograde signaling occurs through a pathway that must efficiently transmit information over long distances, at times over a meter. 
FIGURE 1.7–3.Theneurotrophinhypothesis.Neuronscompeteforlimitedquantitiesof neurotrophins in target regions, which leads to selective neuronal survival. Levels of target- derived neurotrophins and neurotrophin receptors will determine efficacy of survival and responsiveness of the neurons. The ability to form high–affinity-binding sites allows for greater responsiveness under limiting quantities of trophic factors. Lack of trophic support or incorrect targeting of axons to the wrong target results in programmed cell death. 
Neurotrophins promote cell survival and differentiation during neural development. Paradoxically, they can also induce cell death. p75NTR serves as a proapoptotic receptor during developmental cell death and after injury to the nervous system (Fig. 1.7–1). Increases in p75NTR expression are 

========351========

responsible for apoptosis in embryonic retinas and sympathetic neurons during the period of naturally occurring neuronal death. Whereas BDNF binding to p75NTR in sympathetic neurons causes rapid cell death, NGF binding to the TrkA receptor on the same neurons provides a survival signal. In the context of neurotrophin processing, proneurotrophins are more effective than mature NGF in inducing p75NTR-dependent apoptosis. These results suggest that the biological action of the neurotrophins can be regulated by proteolytic cleavage, with proforms preferentially activating p75NTR to mediate apoptosis and mature forms selectively activating Trk receptors to promote survival. 
Neurotrophins may induce apoptosis in order to prune neurons efficiently during periods of developmental cell death. In addition to competing for trophic support from the target, neurons must establish connections with the proper target. In the event of mistargeting, neurons may undergo apoptosis if the appropriate set of trophic factors or receptors is not encountered. For example, BDNF can cause sympathetic cell death by binding to p75NTR in the absence of TrkB. However, NT-4 causes p75NTR-mediated cell death in BDNF-dependent trigeminal neurons, due presumably to preferential p75NTR stimulation over TrkB. Therefore, Trk and p75NTR receptors can give opposite outcomes in the same cells. Cell death mediated by p75NTR may be important for the refinement of correct target innervation during development. 
AXONAL TRANSPORT 
Specificity of the biological effects of neurotrophins can also be modulated by the intracellular location of the neurotrophin ligand receptor complex. During development, neurotrophins are produced and released from the target tissues and become internalized into vesicles, which are then transported to the cell body. Interestingly, the biological effects of neurotrophins require that signals are conveyed over long distances from the nerve terminal to the cell body. Therefore, a central theme of the neurotrophic hypothesis is that neuronal survival and differentiation depend upon the retrograde signaling of trophic factors produced at the target tissue. 
Each neurotrophin binds to transmembrane receptors and undergoes internalization and transport from axon terminals to neuronal cell bodies. Measurements of 
125I-NGF 
transport from distal axons to the cell body in compartment chambers indicate a rate from 3 to 10 mm per hour. Both Trk and p75NTR receptors undergo retrograde transport. The term “signaling endosome” has been coined to describe membrane vesicles that carry Trk, p75NTR, and NGF. 
A complex of NGF–TrkA has been found in clathrin-coated vesicles and endosomes, giving rise to the model that NGF and Trk are components of the retrograde signal. Several tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins are 

========352========

associated with the TrkA receptor during transport, suggesting that signaling by neurotrophins persists following internalization of their receptors. Internalization of NGF from axon terminals is necessary for phosphorylation and activation of the CREB transcription factor, which leads to changes in gene expression and increased neuronal cell survival. These events likely require the internalization and transport of activated Trk receptors and result in a survival response. 
Neurotrophins and Synaptic Plasticity 
Recent studies have established that neurotrophic factors play significant roles in influencing synaptic plasticity in the adult brain. Many neuronal populations are not only dependent upon these neurotrophins for their survival but also for modulating neuronal activity. Developmental regulation of synaptic plasticity in the visual system is illustrated by the formation of ocular dominance columns in layer 4 of the cortex, which can be strongly influenced by exogenous neurotrophins such as BDNF. Also, the effects upon the visual system can be observed using blocking antibodies for the neurotrophins as well as neurotrophin antagonists (TrkB–IgG fusion proteins that bind neurotrophins), indicating that an alteration in the levels of endogenous neurotrophins has dramatic consequences on the formation of critical periods. 
Modulation of synaptic plasticity in the differentiated adult brain has also been demonstrated in the hippocampus in a series of studies. BDNF promoted the induction of a synaptic strengthening, termed LTP, in hippocampal slices, while blocking reagents such as the TrkB–IgG fusion protein interfered with the induction of LTP. In addition, hippocampal preparations containing little or no BDNF gave rise to the same reduction in LTP, suggesting that there was a minimal quantity of BDNF required for the modulation of LTP. Subsequent addition of extra BDNF or adenoviral expression of BDNF to these preparations from mutant mice restored LTP. Neurotrophins have also been shown to evoke other forms of synaptic transmission. Exogenous BDNF or NT-3 has been shown to induce enhanced evoked responses in both hippocampal preparations and neuromuscular junctions. Thus, neurotrophins can modulate synaptic strengthening and neurotransmission as well as promote cell survival and axonal and dendritic growth. Conversely, the precursor of BDNF, proBDNF has been shown to facilitate LTD in hippocampal slices by activation of p75NTR and exogenous proBDNF induces synaptic depression at the neuromuscular synapse, suggesting that proBDNF opposes the actions of mature BDNF on synaptic plasticity. 
Neurotrophins and Behavior 
A recent series of studies on genetically modified mice with reduced levels 

========353========

of BDNF have indicated striking effects upon adult brain function and behavior. These studies are important as earlier neurotrophin knockout mice studies were limited due to embryonic lethality or early postnatal death. However, heterozygous BDNF+/− mice in which BDNF levels are reduced by approximately one-half are viable and display a number of behaviors suggestive of impulse control abnormalities. In the absence of normal levels of BDNF, mice exhibit enhanced aggressiveness, hyperactivity, and hyperphagia. ICV infusion of BDNF or NT-4 led to a striking reversal of the feeding phenotype. In these heterozygous BDNF+/− mice, serotonergic neuronal functioning was abnormal in the forebrain, cortex, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. Most strikingly, administration of fluoxetine, an SSRI, ameliorated the aggressive behavior, hyperphagia, and hyperlocomotor activity. In addition, a region-specific conditional deletion of BDNF in the brains of postnatal mice also led to hyperphagia, hyperactivity, as well as higher levels of anxiety as measured by a light/dark exploration test. This study and other conditional BDNF mice demonstrated that the feeding phenotype and the other behavioral abnormalities were mediated by the functioning of BDNF in the CNS as compared to any peripheral actions of the neurotrophin. 
Lack of BDNF also created defects in memory tasks, consistent with defects in LTP found in the hippocampal slice studies. Haploinsufficient BDNF+/− mice had impairments in spatial memory tasks such as the Morris water maze. Abnormal behaviors elicited by partial deletion of BDNF indicate a significant role for this neurotrophin in higher-order behaviors, which have clinical correlates to psychiatric disorders, especially those associated with alteration in central serotonergic functioning. 
OTHER NEUROTROPHIC FACTORS 
Several prominent neurotrophic factor families carry out similar functions as the neurotrophins. Glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is an 18- kDa protein, originally isolated from an astrocyte cell line and it is produced by many types of neurons. It represents one of the most potent trophic factors for dopaminergic neurons. In both in vitro and in vivo studies, GDNF has been shown to maintain the survival of dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain as well as neurons in the myenteric plexus in the gut. Due to its trophic effects on dopaminergic neurons, it has been considered a potential therapeutic agent for Parkinson disease. 
GDNF binds to a protein, GFRα1, which is anchored to the plasma membrane by a glycophospholipid. Other ligands have also been discovered, namely, artemin, neurturin, and persephin, which recognize specific GFRα receptors. This ligand–receptor complex then associates with Ret, a receptor tyrosine kinase, which, like the Trk receptors, undergoes dimerization and becomes catalytically active. Phosphotyrosine- 

========354========

binding adaptor proteins such as Shc then bind to the Ret receptor and mediate downstream signaling cascades such as the MAP kinase pathway. Mutations in the Ret receptor and GFRα1 have been associated with Hirschsprung disease, a disorder caused by the lack of development of myenteric plexus neurons, leading to abnormal gut motility. 
Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) belongs to a family of cytokines, including leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and interleukin-6, which maintain the survival of ciliary neurons as well as motor neurons. Due to its ability to rescue motor neurons after axotomy in animal studies, CNTF has been investigated as a therapeutic agent for motor neuron diseases such as ALS. These factors utilize a receptor complex consisting of a plasma- membrane–bound CNTF-binding protein (CNTFα), a glycoprotein (gp130), and a LIF receptor (LIFR) to transduce signals. Upon formation of this complex, a soluble tyrosine kinase, the Janus kinase (JAK), is activated and leads to the activation of a specific family of transcription factors termed Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) proteins. 
Therefore, trophic factors exemplified by NGF, CNTF, and GDNF and their family members all utilize intracellular tyrosine phosphorylation to mediate neuronal cell survival. CNTF acts through a complex of a CNTF receptor, gp130, and LIFR subunits that are linked to the JAK/STAT signaling molecules, whereas the GDNF receptor consists of the c-Ret receptor tyrosine kinase and a separate α-binding protein. 
CLINICAL CORRELATES 
Neurotrophic factors regulate numerous neuronal functions in development and adult life and in response to injury. As a result, neurotrophins have been implicated in the pathophysiology of a wide variety of neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders and have been considered as a therapeutic strategy for many neuropsychiatric disorders. It should be emphasized though that few human diseases affecting the nervous system have been shown to be caused by a defect in the neurotrophins or their receptors. Still, the finding that neurotrophic factors modulate neuronal survival and axonal growth was the initial rationale for potential clinical correlates to neurodegenerative disorders and neuronal injury such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, HD, and ALS as well as spinal cord injury. The additional effects of neurotrophic factors on synaptic connections, synaptic plasticity, and neurotransmission have formed the basis for their association with psychiatric disorders such as depression and substance abuse. In these conditions, the response to acute and chronic environmental changes leads to alterations in neuronal function. 
The hypothesis underlying these clinical correlations as well as development of therapeutic strategies using neurotrophic factors assumes that these disease states result in either (1) decreased availability of 

========355========

neurotrophins for the affected neurons, (2) a decreased number of neurotrophin receptors on the affected neurons, and/or (3) decreased neuronal survival. These deficits can be ameliorated by the addition of neurotrophic factors. 
An example of how decreased availability of neurotrophins can account for a neuropsychiatric clinical problem is HD, which is characterized by progressive death of medium spiny neurons in the striatum. One mechanism to explain the pathogenic effects of mutant huntingtin protein is through a decrease in BDNF levels brought on by lower anterograde transport from the cortex to the striatum. Other reported effects have been on transcription of the BDNF gene by mutant huntingtin. In the case of Alzheimer disease, addition of NGF or BDNF to vulnerable regions of the brain, such as the entorhinal cortex or hippocampus, can increase spatial learning and memory retention. 
The assumption has been that exogenous neurotrophic factors would provide symptomatic treatment for the disease state rather than a cure for the core pathophysiology of these nervous system disorders. A more complete cell expression profile of the neurotrophins and their receptors in well-defined circuits will provide strategies to target degenerative disorders of different origins. 
Neurodegenerative Disorders 
The initial clinical correlation to Alzheimer disease was made in the 1980s based on studies on aged animals that showed that cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain could be rescued with ICV NGF, resulting in concomitant improvements in memory function. Subsequent animal studies of impaired motor neuron populations demonstrated that other neurotrophins, BDNF, NT-3, NT-4, and CNTF, could rescue those neurons in an axotomized facial nerve and sciatic nerve. In addition, mutant mouse models of motor neuron disease (progressive motor neuron disease, wobbler), in which there was motor neuron degeneration, demonstrated that BDNF and CNTF could increase the number of motor neurons and improve motor performance. These studies led to the therapeutic strategy to attempt to treat degenerative diseases affecting motor neurons with neurotrophins. 
In the 1990s, great effort was focused on studying whether neurotrophic factors could be used as a treatment strategy for ALS, a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that specifically affects motor neurons and leads to death due to respiratory failure. With the development of recombinant forms of the neurotrophic factors, namely, BDNF, clinical trials have taken place on patients with ALS. Subcutaneous or intrathecal delivered BDNF had minimal beneficial effect and was associated with side effects such as pain and gastrointestinal symptoms. It was due to these side effects that decreased doses were used as compared to the doses in the 

========356========

animal studies. Similarly, use of another neurotrophic factor, CNTF, also led to even more significant side effects such as fever, pain, and anorexia, which also limited the doses used. These multisite clinical trials highlighted the challenges of delivery of large quantities of these proteins to CNS and PNS neurons. Similar clinical studies using NGF for the treatment of patients with Alzheimer disease and diabetic neuropathy encountered similar hurdles involving problems of delivery and uncertain pharmacokinetics of the proteins. 
Although these clinical trials have been disappointing, there is growing evidence that several specific neurodegenerative diseases would benefit from increasing the levels of neurotrophins. HD is caused by a polyQ expansion in the huntingtin protein, which results in abnormal motor movements, personality changes, cognitive decline, and early death. Many studies have indicated that BDNF is a major target of mutant huntingtin protein. Decreased BDNF levels in the striatum have been detected in human HD subjects and mouse models of HD. A transgenic animal model in which BDNF has been specifically reduced in the cortex resulted in early dendritic changes, later loss of striatal medium spinal neurons, and early onset of clasping behavior. Moreover, gene expression profiling indicates that the depletion of BDNF in the cortex most closely resembles early grade human HD. These results suggest that striatal-specific atrophy in HD may be a consequence of a decrease in cortical BDNF by mutant huntingtin. 
Correlates to Psychiatric Disorders 
The profound effects of neurotrophic factors on synaptic connections, synaptic plasticity, and neurotransmission have formed the basis for their association with psychiatric disorders, such as anxiety disorders, depression, and substance abuse. In these conditions, the response to acute and chronic environmental changes leads to alterations in neuronal function. These additional functions have made neurotrophins attractive molecular intermediates that may be involved in the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders in which environmental inputs can presumably lead to alterations in neuronal circuitry and ultimately behavior. In particular, it has become clear that neurotrophins can produce long-term changes by regulating transcriptional programs on the functioning of adult neurons. This could explain the long delay in therapeutic action of many psychiatric treatments. Again the clinical correlation is based on the assumption that there is a deficit in access or responsiveness to neurotrophic factors contributing to the phenotype of the disease state. 
Major Depressive Disorder 
The strongest evidence for a role of neurotrophins has come from the pathophysiology of depression, especially those associated with stress. For 

========357========

depression, it is believed that there is a fundamental dysregulation of synaptic plasticity and neuronal survival in regions of the brain such as the hippocampus. There are several lines of evidence suggesting a role of neurotrophins in depression. First, in animal models, restraint stress leads to decreased expression of BDNF in the hippocampus. In addition, chronic physical or psychosocial stress leads to atrophy and death of hippocampal neurons especially in the CA3 region in rodents and primates. Also, MRI studies have shown that patients with depressive or PTSDs exhibit a small decrease in hippocampal volume. It is unclear though whether the atrophy and/or death of these neurons is directly related to the decreased availability of BDNF. In addition, not all forms of depression are associated with stress. However, if structural remodeling and synaptic plasticity are involved in the cellular pathophysiology of depression, then BDNF is an attractive candidate molecule to mediate these alterations. 
Exogenously administered BDNF in the hippocampus had antidepressant effects in two animal models of depression (i.e., the forced swim and learned helplessness paradigms) comparable to those of chronic treatment with pharmacological antidepressants. In addition, BDNF has also been shown to have trophic effects on serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons in vitro and in vivo. Mutant mice with decreased levels of BDNF have been shown to have a selective decrement in serotonergic neuron function and corresponding behavioral dysfunction consistent with serotonergic abnormalities. 
Also, serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor antidepressants upregulate CREB, a cAMP-dependent transcription factor, and BDNF in a time course that corresponds to therapeutic action (10 to 20 days). The CREB transcription factor is involved in the induction of BDNF gene expression in neurons. This effect on the cAMP pathway provides a link between monoamine antidepressants and neurotrophin actions. These antidepressant treatments also lead to increases in expression of TrkB receptors in the hippocampus in a time course that also parallels the long time course of therapeutic action of these treatments. The effect of prolonged serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor treatment involves enhancing neurotrophin signaling. Two other antidepressant treatments, MAOIs and ECT, also upregulate BDNF transcription. In rodents, long-term ECT has been shown to elicit the sprouting of hippocampal neurons that was attenuated in mutant mice that express lower levels of BDNF. Finally, recent studies have demonstrated that ketamine, a noncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, could mediate a rapid antidepressant response through a BDNF-dependent mechanism. In particular, after NMDA receptor blockade, there is a desuppression of protein translation resulting in an upregulation of BDNF that triggers enhanced synaptic plasticity. 
Conversely, exogenously administered BDNF in the mesolimbic 

========358========

dopamine system appears to have an opposite effect—increasing depression-like behavior. In addition, removal of BDNF in this dopamine circuit appears to have antidepressant effects on a social defeat paradigm. These findings emphasize the complexity of BDNF’s role in mediating aspects of behavior related to depression. Together, these studies provide a framework to examine further the neurotrophin system as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of depression. 
NEUROTROPHINS AND GENETICS 
Until recently, few genetic associations have been found between any neurotrophin and a human neurological or psychiatric disorder. A recent series of studies has linked one polymorphism in the BDNF gene with depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. This polymorphism identified from a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) screen leads to a single amino acid change from valine (Val) to methionine (Met) at position 66 in the pro region of the BDNF protein. This region is believed to be important in proper folding and intracellular sorting of the BDNF. Interestingly, proforms of neurotrophins have recently been shown to act as selective ligands for the p75NTR. The mechanisms that contribute to altered BDNFMet function have been studied in neuronal culture systems. The distribution of BDNFMet to neuronal dendrites and its activity- dependent secretion are decreased. These trafficking abnormalities are likely to reflect impaired binding of BDNFMet to a sorting protein, sortilin, which interacts with BDNF in the prodomain region that encompasses the Met substitution. 
This polymorphism is common in human populations with an allele frequency of 20 to 30 percent in Caucasian populations. This alteration in a neurotrophin gene correlates with reproducible alterations in human carriers. Humans heterozygous for the Met allele have smaller hippocampal volumes and perform poorly on hippocampal-dependent memory tasks. Using batteries of neuropsychological tests, carriers of the Met allele performed worse on tasks that involved recalling places and events but did not differ from Val/Val individuals on tasks that have been classically shown to be less hippocampal-dependent, such as word learning and planning tasks. 
However, genetic association studies for psychiatric disorders have presented a more complex picture. In patients with bipolar disorder, the Val allele appears to confer greater risk for the disease, while in patients with schizophrenia, depression, and anxiety disorders, there is little consensus as to whether the allele confers altered susceptibility, though recent studies suggest that the Met allele may have impact on treatment response in PTSD. Inconsistency across genetic studies may be attributable to sampling and measurement issues, genetic heterogeneity due to 

========359========

differential sampling of populations, or a low frequency of homozygous Met carriers, which may lessen the effect size of any particular association. It may also relate to a failure to take into account relevant gene-by-gene and gene-by-environment interactions. This point is highlighted by a recent study of BDNF “knock-in” in mice (BDNFMet/Met). The knock-in mice reproduced the phenotypic hallmarks related to hippocampal function that are seen in humans with this BDNF SNP. Subsequent analyses of these mice elucidated phenotypes that had not been initially identified in human carriers: increased anxiety and decreased capacity for fear extinction learning. In addition, when stressed, BDNFMet/Met mice display increased anxiety-related behaviors, suggesting that environmental factors are likely required to elicit symptoms related to psychiatric disorders. 
THERAPEUTIC POTENTIAL OF NEUROTROPHINS 
The recent clinical trials have provided limits in designing therapeutic strategies to use neurotrophic factors for neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders. First, it has become clear that the physical delivery of sufficient quantities to target neurons is a major obstacle. Development of small molecules that readily cross the BBB to activate neurotrophin receptors or potentiate the actions of neurotrophins is an approach that is in its infancy. 
Second, because neurotrophins have multiple effects on neuronal activity, indiscriminate “flooding” of the CNS with neurotrophic factors will likely lead to untoward side effects such as epileptic activity. In addition, it had been noted in the clinical trials with BDNF that downregulation of the TrkB receptors after unregulated application of BDNF may have also contributed to the minimal therapeutic effects. New strategies are being studied that include more local and regulated application of neurotrophins through stereotactic injection of viral vectors or engineered progenitor cells. In particular, this approach is currently being applied to diseases such as Alzheimer disease where there is a defined neuronal population such as basal forebrain cholinergic neurons that undergoes degeneration and is dependent on one neurotrophin such as NGF. 
The activation of the neurotrophin system through other receptor signaling systems offers an alternative strategy. For example, antidepressant agents acting via monoamine GPCRs can lead to increased expression of both neurotrophins and neurotrophin receptors. Importantly, only the neurons that express the monoamine GPCRs will have enhanced production of the neurotrophin or Trk receptor. Recently, it has also been shown that other GPCRs, the purine adenosine 2A receptor, and pituitary adenylate-cyclase–activating peptide (PACAP) neuropeptide receptor can transactivate Trk neurotrophin receptors in the absence of neurotrophins in hippocampal neurons in vitro. Therefore, small molecules can activate Trk receptors in the absence of neurotrophins. These results raise the 

========360========

possibility that small molecules may be used to elicit neurotrophic effects for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases by selective targeting of neurons that express specific GPCRs and Trk receptors. 
Other potent ways of increasing the level of neurotrophins involve using specific classes of antidepressant drugs. As many antidepressants are clinically effective only after several weeks of administration, newer approaches have examined the effects of ketamine, a fast acting, noncompetitive NMDA antagonist, in the treatment of MDD. The antidepressant effects are believed to be due, in part, to the actions of BDNF. In a similar vein, physical exercise robustly increases the expression of brain BDNF, which is associated with improvements in cognition function, neurogenesis and anxiolytic effects. 
It should be emphasized that all these strategies to utilize neurotrophic factors are based on an assumption of symptomatic treatment of impaired neurons. This impairment implies not only cell survival but also proper physiological functioning and connectivity of these neurons. With greater understanding of the signal transduction pathways that are activated by neurotrophins, alternate strategies can be devised to manipulate these pathways through new drug development. A completely different approach is to block neurotrophins, such as NGF, which elicits hyperalgesia after tissue damage or inflammation. Development of neutralizing antibodies against NGF and their administration to reduce pain thresholds has proven to be efficacious in many clinical pain conditions. Therefore, further understanding of the core pathophysiological mechanism for neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders will benefit the development of rational therapies that involve engaging the neurotrophin system. 
REFERENCES 
Berton O, McClung CA, Dileone RJ, et al. Essential role of BDNF in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway in social defeat stress. Science. 2006;311:864–868. 
Bespalov MM, Saarma M. GDNF family receptor complexes are emerging drug targets. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2007;28:68–74. 
Cabelli RJ, Hohn A, Shatz CJ. Inhibition of ocular dominance column formation by infusion of NT4/5 or BDNF. Science. 1995;267:1662–1666. 
Casey BJ, Glatt CE, Lee FS. Treating the developing versus developed brain: translating preclinical mouse and human studies. Neuron. 2015;86:1358–1368. 
Chao MV. Neurotrophins and their receptors: a convergence point for many signaling pathways. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2003;4:299–309. 
Chao MV, Hempstead BL. p75 and Trk: a two-receptor system. Trends Neurosci. 1995;18:321– 326. 
*Chen ZY, Jing DQ, Bath KG, et al. Genetic variant BDNF (Val66Met) polymorphism alters anxiety-related behavior. Science. 2006;314:140–143. 
*Duman RS, Heninger GR, Nestler EJ. A molecular and cellular theory of depression. Arch Gen 

========361========

Psychiatry. 1997;54:597–606. 
Felmingham KL, Dobson-Stone C, Schofield PR, Quirk GJ, Bryant RA. The brain-derived neurotrophic factor Val66Met polymorphism predicts response to exposure therapy in posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2013;73(11):1059–1063. 
*Hempstead BL. The many faces of p75NTR. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2002;12:260–267. 
Ibanez CF, Andressoo JO. Biology of GDNF and its receptors - relevance for disorders of the central nervous system. Neurobiol Dis. 2016. (epub). 
Kaplan DR, Miller FD. Neurotrophin signal transduction in the nervous system. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2000;10:381–391. 
Lee FS, Chao MV. Activation of Trk neurotrophin receptors in the absence of neurotrophins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:3555–3560. 
Lee FS, Kim AH, Khursigara G, Chao MV. The uniqueness of being a neurotrophin receptor. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2001;11:281–286. 
Lee R, Kermani P, Teng KK, Hempstead BL. Regulation of cell survival by secreted proneurotrophins. Science. 2001;294:1945–1948. 
Levi-Montalcini R. The nerve growth factor: thirty-five years later. Science. 1987;237:1154–1162. *Lyons WE, Mamounas LA, Ricaurte GA, et al. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor-deficient mice develop aggressiveness and hyperphagia in conjunction with brain serotonergic abnormalities. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96:15239–15244. 
Mariga A, Mitre M, Chao MV. Consequences of brain-derived neurotrophic factor withdrawal in CNS neurons and implications in disease. Neurobiol Dis. 2016. 
Minichiello L, Calella AM, Medina DL, Bonhoeffer T, Klein R. Mechanism of TrkB-mediated hippocampal long-term potentiation. Neuron. 2002;36:121–137. 
*Monteggia LM, Zarate C. Antidepressant actions of ketamine: from molecular mechanisms to clinical practice. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2015;30:139–143. 
Notaras M, Hill R, van den Buuse M. The BDNF gene Val66Met polymorphism as a modifier of psychiatric disorder susceptibility: progress and controversy. Mol Psychiatry. 2015;20:916– 930. 
Park H, Poo MM. Neurotrophin regulation of neural circuit development and function. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013;14:7–23. 
Petryshen TL, Sabeti PC, Aldinger KA, et al. Population genetic study of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene. Mol Psychiatry. 2010;15(8):810–815. 
Riccio A, Ahn S, Davenport CM, Blendy JA, Ginty DD. Mediation by a CREB family transcription factor of NGF-dependent survival of sympathetic neurons. Science. 1999;286:2358–2361. Rios M. BDNF and the central control of feeding: accidental bystander or essential player? Trends Neurosci. 2013;36(2):83–90. 
Shirayama Y, Chen AC, Nakagawa S, Russell DS, Duman RS. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor produces antidepressant effects in behavioral models of depression. J Neurosci. 2002;22:3251–3261. 
Snider WD. Functions of the neurotrophins during nervous system development: what the knockouts are teaching us. Cell. 1994;77:627–638. 
Strand AD, Baquet ZC, Aragaki AK, et al. Expression of profiling of Huntington’s disease models suggests BDNF depletion plays a major role in striatal degeneration. J Neurosci. 

========362========

2007;27:11758–11768. 
Thoenen H, Sendtner M. Neurotrophins: From enthusiastic expectations through sobering experiences to rational therapeutic approaches. Nat Neurosci. 2002;5:1046–1050. 
Yamashita N, Kuruvilla R. Neurotrophin signaling endosomes: biogenesis, regulation, and functions. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2016;39:139–145. 

========363========

▲ 1.8 Novel Neurotransmitters 
THOMAS W. SEDLAK, M.D., PH.D., AND ADAM I. KAPLIN, M.D., PH.D. 
Neurotransmitters are chemicals that amplify or inhibit the depolarization signal from one neuron to that of an adjacent neuron. A neurotransmitter is typically released from a presynaptic neuron and travels across a small space, the synaptic cleft or synapse, to act upon the postsynaptic neuron. Neurotransmitters may be excitatory (e.g., glutamate) in that they promote depolarization of the target cell, or inhibitory by promoting hyperpolarization (e.g., most GABA). Neurotransmitter receptors that are themselves ion channels may elicit depolarization via the neurons they conduct, typically depolarization via sodium or calcium, and hyperpolarization via chloride. In addition to ion channel receptors are metabotropic receptors that produce second messengers that may have complex effects upon target cells, such as altering gene expression or modulating the propensity to depolarize. 
An action potential is a wave of depolarization that travels down a neuronal axon to the presynaptic terminal, a specialized appendage where neurotransmitters are stored in specialized vesicles. The action potential opens voltage-sensitive calcium channels in the membrane, allowing for an increase in cellular calcium that results in vesicles releasing their contents into the synaptic cleft and acting upon receptors on the postsynaptic neuron membrane. When binding to their targets, neurotransmitters are typically full or partial agonists, and therapeutic drugs range from partial to full agonists, to antagonists or inverse agonists (Fig. 1.8–1). 

========364========

FIGURE 1.8–1. Agonists, antagonists, partial agonists, and inverse agonists. A: Agonist drugs bind to a target, such as a neurotransmitter receptor, and increase its activity until the receptors saturate. A partial agonist increases the activity of its target, but to a level below that of its maximum. In some cases, a partial agonist leads to diminished overall activity of a neurotransmitter receptor because it competes with the full agonist neurotransmitter. Occasionally a drug considered to be an agonist becomes reclassified as a partial agonist once a stronger agonist is found. THC was once considered a full agonist for the CB1 receptor, but was found to be a partial agonist after the discovery of the more potent synthetic cannabinoids, CP55,940 and WIN55,212–2. B: An antagonist has no intrinsic activity for activating or inhibiting a receptor. It acts to inhibit the activity of an agonist, in many cases by competing with an agonist for the binding site. C: An inverse agonist inhibits the activity of its target to a level below that of its baseline level with no drug present. Rimonabant is a CB1 receptor inverse agonist. It can block the baseline activity of the receptor even in the absence of cannabinoid agonists. 
The definition of what a neurotransmitter is and is not has changed over the decades. The neurotransmitters initially discovered were small chemicals, first acetylcholine and later biogenic amines such as serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, and histamine. Later it was found that amino acids and peptides could act as neurotransmitters, such as the case of enkephalin being the transmitter acting upon the opiate receptor. By the 1990s, it became apparent that the neurotransmitter acting on cannabinoid receptors was derived from cellular lipids. Furthermore, even a gas, nitric oxide, could be a neurotransmitter, bypassing the requirement for postsynaptic receptors and acting directly within postsynaptic neurons. 
GASES AS NEUROTRANSMITTERS Nitric Oxide 

========365========

The discovery that gases could function as neurotransmitters revealed that highly atypical modes of signaling existed between neurons. In the early 1990s, nitric oxide was the first gas to be ascribed a neurotransmitter function and proved to be an atypical neurotransmitter for several reasons. First, it was not stored in or released from synaptic vesicles; as it was a small gas, it could freely diffuse across cell membranes and into the target neuron. Second, its target was not a specific receptor on the surface of a target neuron, but intracellular proteins whose activity could directly be modulated. Nitric oxide also lacks a reuptake mechanism to remove it from the synapse. Although its enzymatic inactivation is postulated to exist, nitric oxide is also limited by a short half life of a few seconds. 
Nitric oxide was initially discovered as a bactericidal compound released from macrophages and as an endothelial-cell-derived relaxation factor allowing for the dilation of blood vessels. A role for nitric oxide in the brain followed, revealing a role for the gas in neurotransmission, learning and memory processes, neurogenesis, and neurodegenerative diseases. 
Synthesis of Nitric Oxide . Nitric oxide is chemically designated NO., with the dot representing that the molecule is a free radical, also imparting a highly reactive nature. Nitric oxide is occasionally confused with nitrous oxide (N2O), the gaseous anesthetic, and nitrogen dioxide (NO2), a pollutant found in exhaust fumes, although these are not synthesized endogenously in mammals. A specific enzyme exists to generate nitric oxide within cells, nitric oxide synthase (NOS) (Fig. 1.8–2). This enzyme generates nitric oxide by abstracting nitrogen from the amino acid arginine and reacting it with an oxygen atom. The enzyme utilizes nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and generates citrulline as a byproduct. 
Three distinct enzymatic forms of NOS exist, each with differing locations and activation patterns within the body. Neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) was the first form discovered, by Bredt and Snyder, and is the predominant form in the brain. Neuronal NOS is expressed only in neurons, especially those of the cortex, dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, corpus striatum, and cerebellum. Although nNOS-containing neurons are only 1 percent of cortical neurons, their neuronal processes are so extensively distributed that almost all neurons make contact with an nNOS-containing nerve terminus. nNOS enzyme activity is markedly augmented by calcium levels via the accessory protein calmodulin. Thus, nitric oxide may be synthesized following neuronal depolarization, in which calcium levels increase transiently. 

========366========

FIGURE 1.8–2. Enzymatic generation of nitric oxide. The gaseous neurotransmitter, nitric oxide, is generated by the enzyme nitric oxide synthase. The amino acid arginine is converted to citrulline and nitric oxide, employing oxygen and the reductant NADPH. Of note, nitric oxide is not preformed and stored in synaptic vesicles, but synthesized on demand. 
Endothelial NOS (eNOS) is predominantly found in blood vessels, where it plays a crucial role in allowing for the relaxation and dilation of blood vessels. Nitroglycerine and sodium nitroprusside exert their vasodilatory effects via conversion to nitric oxide. eNOS activity is augmented by phosphorylation and increases in intracellular calcium. The third NOS, inducible NOS (iNOS), exists in many tissues in miniscule amounts. However, its levels are strongly increased by a great variety of cell stressors, especially inflammation. In the brain, it is largely induced in glial cells, but also neurons. 
Mechanism of Action of Nitric Oxide: Cyclic GMP Pathway. Long-term changes in brain function, such as learning and memory, involve a great variety of cellular processes, including changes in the patterns of gene and protein expression, and physical remodeling of neuronal architecture, such as dendrites. Signal transduction is the process by which extracellular signals, such as neuronal depolarization and receptor activation, lead to modified cellular function. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) is a prototypic intracellular messenger whose synthesis by guanylyl cyclase is 

========367========

stimulated after a membrane receptor is activated. cGMP then activates protein kinases that phosphorylate proteins as part of the cascade that elicits the biological effect. As is the case with other neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, nitric oxide also activates cGMP production in neurons (Fig. 1.8–3). While a typical neurotransmitter activates guanylyl cyclase via a G protein coupled to a membrane receptor, nitric oxide directly activates soluble guanylyl cyclase, the enzymatic form found in cytoplasm. The active site of guanylyl cyclase contains a heme group cofactor whose iron atom is bound by nitric oxide, leading to a protein conformation change and production of cGMP. Nitric oxide can also interact with the heme groups of other proteins including hemoglobin/myoglobin, ferritin, and cytochrome P450. 
FIGURE 1.8–3. Neurotransmitter and signaling functions of nitric oxide (NO) via production of cyclic GMP. Gaseous nitric oxide is generated enzymatically and freely diffuses into an adjacent neuron (upper right). In comparison to traditional neurotransmitters (upper left), NO does not act via a specific neurotransmitter receptor on the surface membrane of a neuron. In contrast, NO freely diffuses across the neuronal membrane and activates the enzyme, guanylyl cyclase, which converts GTP into the second messenger, cyclic GMP. Nitric oxide effects are mediated, in part, by cyclic GMP activation of neuronal protein kinases, new gene expression and effects on neuronal long term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD). ATP, adenosine triphosphate; PDE, phosphodiesterase. 

========368========

FIGURE 1.8–4. Nitric oxide (NO) signaling via S-nitrosylation. In addition to NO activation of guanylyl cyclase, NO may also directly alter protein function via the process of S-nitrosylation. In this process, which does not require enzymatic catalysis, NO reacts with - SH groups of protein cysteine residues, resulting in an –SNO modification and altered protein function. Some proteins demonstrate robust activation following S-nitrosylation, whereas others are inhibited by the process. 
Mechanism of Action of Nitric Oxide: S-Nitrosylation Pathway. A second method by which nitric oxide exerts it effects upon cells is by the process of S-nitrosylation. In this signaling mechanism, nitric oxide directly modifies the sulfur atom of a protein cysteine residue, forming an S-nitrosothiol group (Fig. 1.8–4) that modifies the activity of select proteins. This generation of this modification requires no enzyme, though there is evidence that some proteins may carry the modification around to different areas of the cell and transfer it to a destination protein that elicits the target effect. Proteins that have been nitrosylated vary in their response to this modification; some are activated and others inactivated. 
The number of protein targets of S-nitrosylation is rapidly expanding and includes molecules involved in signal transduction, programmed cell death, transcription factors, cytoskeletal proteins, ion pumps, and ion channels. In many cases, modification of a single cysteine residue in a target protein is sufficient for nitric oxide to regulate its activity. Specific targets that are activated by S-nitrosylation include L-type calcium channels, calcium-activated potassium channels, and GABA-A receptors. Proteins inhibited by nitrosylation include several types of sodium channels, the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of the glutamate neurotransmitter receptor, and several metabolic enzymes. S-nitrosylation as a means of signal transduction is somewhat analogous to protein phosphorylation, as both are reversible covalent modifications that regulate protein function to change cell activity. S-nitrosylation might participate in memory, learning, and behavior as many brain proteins are nitrosylated 

========369========

through the activity of neuronal nitric oxide generation. 
Nitric Oxide and Neurotransmission. LTP is the process by which repetitive stimulation of a presynaptic neuron leads to stronger firing of a postsynaptic neuron, a process that underlies changes in learning and behavior. Induction of LTP depends on activation of postsynaptic NMDA receptors, while LTP maintenance relies on presynaptic mechanisms. Neurotransmission through the NMDA receptor facilitates LTP, in part, through the activity of nitric oxide. Activation of the NMDA receptor leads to a cellular calcium increase, promoting nitric oxide synthesis and cGMP formation in the postsynaptic cell (Fig. 1.8–5). 
Pharmacological inhibitors of NOS have revealed deficits in LTP in rodent, bird, and honeybee models, and nitric oxide has been implicated in both short-term and long-term memory acquisition. Genetically modified mice lacking either nNOS or eNOS demonstrate no changes in LTP in the hippocampus; however, mice deficient in both nNOS and eNOS show decreased LTP in the CA1 region of the hippocampus. One form of NOS may compensate for the absence of the other, or the two may function cooperatively in LTP. Studies of the enteric nervous system have also revealed roles for nitric oxide in relaxation of the pyloric sphincter, and mice deficient in nNOS reveal a marked hypertrophy of the pylorus. Nitric oxide may also regulate monoaminergic neurotransmission. Inhibition of NOS in rats enhances the effects of cocaine and amphetamine, while the reverse is observed by increasing nitric oxide. 

========370========

FIGURE 1.8–5. Nitric oxide (NO) generation following NMDA receptor activation. The presynaptic neuron (top) releases glutamate (not shown), activating the NMDA glutamate receptor and allowing for calcium entry into the postsynaptic neuron. Calcium binds to the protein calmodulin (CaM), which in turn activates neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) to synthesize NO. A freely diffusible gas, NO exerts effects upon the target neuron via formation of cyclic GMP and S-nitrosylation (Figs. 1.8–3 and 1.8–4). 
Nitric Oxide and Behavior. Nitric oxide neurotransmission may play a role in behavior as nNOS-deficient male mice display exaggerated aggressive tendencies and increased sexual activity. In female mice, the contrary is true, as they have reduced aggression. As manic bipolar patients may show both hypersexuality and aggression, the nitric oxide pathway 

========371========

may participate in the psychopathology of affective states. 
In the periphery, nNOS localizes to neurons that innervate blood vessels of the penis, including the corpus cavernosa. Stimulation of these nerves releases nitric oxide, leading to cGMP formation, blood vessel wall relaxation and vasodilatation, penile engorgement, and initial erection. The sustained phase of erection also depends on nitric oxide; turbulent blood flow leads to phosphorylation of eNOS and sustained nitric oxide production. Drugs used in treatment of erectile dysfunction, sildenafil (Viagra), tadalafil (Cialis), and vardenafil (Levitra), act to inhibit type 5 phosphodiesterase, an enzyme that degrades cGMP in the penis (Fig. 1.8– 3), thereby potentiating nitric oxide neurotransmission and penile erection. 
Numerous lines of evidence have suggested a role for nitric oxide in the regulation of sleep-wake cycles. nNOS-expressing neurons occur in several areas that initiate rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, including the pons, dorsal raphe nucleus, laterodorsal tegmentum, and pedunculopontine tegmentum. In animal models, microinjection of compounds that release nitric oxide result in decreased wakefulness and increased slow-wave sleep (SWS). Consistent with this, NOS inhibitors show a trend toward decreasing slow wave and REM sleep. Studies of NOS-deficient mice suggest that nitric oxide may serve a more complex role than merely promoting sleep. nNOS-deficient animals also show reduced REM sleep; however, iNOS-deficient mice demonstrate the reverse, suggesting a complex interplay between NOS enzymatic isoforms. 
Nitric Oxide and Mood Disorders. 
NOS-expressing neurons are well- 
represented in brain areas implicated in depression, including the dorsal raphe nucleus and prefrontal cortex. A role for nitric oxide has been suggested in antidepressant response as SSRI antidepressants can directly inhibit NOS activity. Moreover, in animal studies such as the forced swim 
test, 
NOS, 
and 
soluble 
guanylyl 
cyclase 
inhibitors 
can 
achieve 
antidepressant-like effects. Plasma nitric oxide levels were elevated in patients with bipolar disorder compared to healthy control subjects. However, in depressed subjects, studies have found decreased nitric oxide levels and increased plasma nitrite, a byproduct of nitric oxide. Reduced NOS has also been described in the PVN of patients with schizophrenia and 
depression compared to controls. 
Neurogenesis, the process by which new neurons are generated in the adult brain, is increasingly appreciated to participate in both mood 
disorder 
pathophysiology 
and 
antidepressant 
response. 
Increased 
hippocampal neurogenesis is associated with antidepressant response, and smaller hippocampal volume may be a risk factor for mood and anxiety disorders. Serotonin itself appears to promote neurogenesis in the hippocampus, while nitric oxide has been found to inhibit neurogenesis. Pharmacologic inhibitors of NOS result in increased serotonin and 

========372========

neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, a paramount site of this process. These NOS inhibitors also lead to an increase in serotonin in the dentate gyrus. Unsurprisingly, nNOS-deficient animals also manifest increased proliferation in the dentate gyrus. As steroids appear to induce NOS expression, nitric oxide may contribute to effects upon mood and anxiety often observed in those treated with these agents. 
Nitric oxide has been interrogated for its ability to regulate neurotransmission at serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine nerve termini. Nitric oxide appears to possess the capability of either increasing or decreasing activity at these neurons depending upon the specific brain region and timing of its activation. 
Nitric Oxide and Schizophrenia. Nitric oxide has been investigated as a candidate molecule contributing to symptoms of schizophrenia. Two genetic studies have identified schizophrenia-associated SNPs in CAPON, a protein that associates with nNOS. SNPs in nNOS itself have been associated with schizophrenia, although others have not been able to reproduce such findings. Changes in NOS levels have been reported in postmortem brain samples of individuals with schizophrenia. Abnormalities have been noted in the cortex, cerebellum, hypothalamus, and brainstem, although no specific trend can be discerned. Elevated NOS activity has been noted in platelets from drug-naïve and drug-treated individuals with schizophrenia. Some investigators find increased nitric oxide activity and others the reverse. In autopsy samples, patients with schizophrenia were found to have abnormally localized NOS-expressing neurons in the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and lateral temporal lobe, consistent with abnormal migration of these neuronal types during development. In a rat model, prenatal stress led to reduced NOS- expressing neurons in the fascia dentate and hippocampus. 
Neuropathologic Roles of Nitric Oxide. Abundant evidence exists that nitric oxide is a direct participant in a variety of neuropathic events. Superoxide, a byproduct of cellular metabolism, can react with nitric oxide to form peroxynitrite (chemical formula, ONOO−). This labile and toxic compound forms chemical adducts with protein tyrosine residues, a process termed protein nitration, and DNA, leading to cellular dysfunction. Cell loss resulting from ischemic stroke is mediated in part by overstimulation of the glutamate NMDA receptor, a process termed excitotoxicity. Nitric oxide produced by NMDA activation appears to mediate a significant portion of this excitotoxic neuronal death, and stroke damage is reduced in mice with a genetic deletion of nNOS. 
S-Nitrosylation has also been implicated in pathologic processes in the brain. Mutations in the Parkin protein are associated with early-onset Parkinson disease. Parkin is an E3 ubiquitin ligase, adding ubiquitin 

========373========

molecules to proteins and targeting them for destruction in the cell proteasome. In sporadic Parkinson disease, that is, without the early-onset mutation, nitric oxide can nitrosylate the Parkin protein and inhibit its protective E3 ubiquitin ligase function. An overabundance of nitric oxide signaling may thus predispose to the dysfunction and cell death of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson disease by interfering with proteins essential for cell functioning. In Alzheimer disease, excess oxidation of brain protein, lipids, and carbohydrates has long been appreciated, but nitrosative stress from excess nitric oxide also appears to participate in the disease. Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is a cellular protective protein that may help combat the accumulation of misfolded proteins such as the amyloid fibrils occurring in the disease. In both Alzheimer and Parkinson disease brains, PDI appears to be S-nitrosylated in a harmful way that impedes its cellular protective function. 
The discovery that nitric oxide participates in neurodegenerative processes raises the possibility for improved diagnostic processes, such as detecting damage to cellular components produced by nitric oxide prior to the onset of full-blown symptoms. In addition, drugs may be designed to attenuate the damage to crucial neuronal proteins that protect against disease onset. However, completely and nonspecifically inhibiting or stimulating nitric oxide synthesis is likely to produce significant side effects because of its wide-ranging activities throughout the body. 
Nitric oxide is one of the most intensively studied compounds in the body, and possesses pleiotropic activities in different organs. While nitric oxide has physiologic roles in the brain, vasculature, and immune system, it is a complex and incompletely understood molecule that also participates in disease. However, oxygen, which is a highly reactive molecule like nitric oxide, also possesses the capacity to contribute to disease pathogenesis, such as in oxidative damage, while still being essential for life. 
Carbon Monoxide 
Although carbon monoxide (chemical formula, CO) is most well known as an air pollutant derived from combustion reactions, it is produced physiologically in a great variety of organisms ranging from human to bacterium. While once thought to be a toxic byproduct of metabolic reactions, carbon monoxide is increasingly recognized to play an important role in regulating a variety of physiological processes in the brain and other organs. These varied effects include regulation of olfactory neurotransmission, blood vessel relaxation, smooth muscle cell proliferation, and platelet aggregation. 
Carbon monoxide is far more well known for its toxic effects than its activities at physiologic concentrations. It binds tightly to heme molecules within hemoglobin, forming carboxyhemoglobin, which can no longer transport oxygen to tissues. One to two packs per day smokers typically 

========374========

have 3 to 8 percent of their hemoglobin as carboxyhemoglobin, while nonsmokers have less than 2 percent. Following acute carbon monoxide poisoning, 5 to 10 percent carboxyhemoglobin is associated with impaired alertness and cognition, and 30 to 50 percent carboxyhemoglobin leads to significant drops in oxygen transport to tissues. 
Enzymatic Generation of Carbon Monoxide. Carbon monoxide is produced during the metabolism of heme by the action of heme oxygenase (HO). This enzyme utilizes oxygen, the reducing equivalents of NADPH, and the electron donor cytochrome P450 reductase to break open the carbon ring of heme and release a one-carbon fragment as carbon monoxide (Fig. 1.8–6). The reaction also produces the green pigment biliverdin and free iron. Biliverdin is converted to the yellow pigment bilirubin, which like carbon monoxide is no longer solely considered a toxic byproduct. At physiologic concentrations, bilirubin is an enormously potent antioxidant, which can be converted back to its precursor, biliverdin. 
Three forms of HO exist. HO1 is similar to iNOS in that it typically exists at very low levels, but its expression may be potently induced by a great variety of stimuli, such as oxidative stress, inflammation, dopamine, steroids, and growth factors. Indeed, HO1 is one of the most easily induced proteins known. HO2 is not an inducible protein and is predominantly expressed in the brain and testis. HO2 is expressed in discrete neuronal populations throughout the brain, including cortical and hippocampal pyramidal cells, dentate gyrus granule cells, the olfactory bulb, thalamus, hypothalamus, brainstem, and cerebellum. HO3 is an isoform whose significance is poorly understood. 
Molecular Actions of Carbon Monoxide. Similar to nitric oxide, gaseous carbon monoxide can freely diffuse across membranes and directly activate soluble guanylyl cyclase, though it is approximately 30-fold less potent than nitric oxide in doing so. With the ensuing increase in cGMP, protein kinases are activated, leading to some of the manifold effects of carbon monoxide upon cells. The expression of HO2 closely mirrors the expression pattern of guanylyl cyclase, implicating the two as part of a common pathway of neuronal signaling, and inhibitors of HO2 block the generation of cGMP. Similar to the case of nNOS, HO2 can be activated by calcium/calmodulin and phosphorylation, fulfilling the important criterion that a neurotransmitter needs to be rapidly released in response to neuronal depolarization. Carbon monoxide can also activate p38 MAP kinase, though a poorly understood mechanism that does not require cGMP. This important kinase promotes a variety of cellular effects including inhibition of inflammation, cell proliferation, and programmed 

========375========

cell death (apoptosis). 
FIGURE 1.8–6. Synthesis of carbon monoxide, an atypical neurotransmitter. Gaseous carbon monoxide (CO) is enzymatically synthesized in neurons via the enzyme, heme oxygenase, also converting heme into the molecule biliverdin, and liberating free iron (Fe). Similar to nitric oxide, CO is not stored in neuronal vesicles and can freely diffuse across neuronal membranes. CO also similarly activates soluble guanylyl cyclase, and leads to activation of multiple intracellular signaling molecules such as p38 MAP kinase. CO exerts its neurotransmitter and signaling functions at concentrations far below that at which classical CO toxicity occurs. The significance of this pathway in neurons is underlined by the existence of two distinct heme oxygenase enzymes, one of which is predominantly expressed in the brain. Biliverdin is converted to bilirubin via the enzyme biliverdin reductase. Similar to CO, bilirubin is no longer relegated to the status of toxic byproduct and may be an important antioxidant. 
Carbon Monoxide and Neurotransmission. Carbon monoxide appears to participate in the neurotransmission of odorant perception. Odorants lead to carbon monoxide production and subsequent cGMP synthesis that promotes long-term adaptation to odor stimuli. Carbon monoxide has the potential to regulate a variety of perceptual and cognitive processes that are yet untested. Similarly, in the rat retina, long periods of light exposure lead to increased HO1 expression, carbon monoxide production, and cGMP signaling. Carbon monoxide may also participate in adaptation to chronic pain. HO2-deficient animals manifest reduced hyperalgesia and allodynia after exposure to chronic pain stimuli. Carbon monoxide may thus set the threshold for pain perception, although it is unclear whether the effect occurs in the CNS and the PNS. Aside from its role in promoting cGMP production, carbon monoxide may also directly bind to and open the BKCa channel, leading to as yet uncharacterized effects on neurotransmission. 
In the gastrointestinal nervous system, carbon monoxide serves as a neurotransmitter to relax the internal anal sphincter in response to nonadrenergic noncholinergic (NANC) nerve stimulation and VIP. Mice 

========376========

rendered genetically deficient of HO2 demonstrate a 50 percent reduction in NANC neurotransmission, as do nNOS-deficient animals. Mice that are 
bred to 
have 
loss 
of 
both HO2 
and nNOS have 
their NANC 
neurotransmission abolished, establishing a physiologic process mediated 
entirely by gaseous neurotransmitters. 
diminished bulbospongiosus abnormalities. 
Carbon monoxide has been implicated in the development of hippocampal LTP, although lines of evidence are contradictory. Carbon monoxide and tetanic stimulation of nerves lead to increased excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs). HO inhibitors that block carbon monoxide production lead to impaired induction of LTP and reduced calcium- dependent release of glutamate neurotransmitter. However, HO2-deficient animals fail to manifest any differences in LTP. These disparate findings may be explained by a role for HO1 in LTP, or an ability of HO inhibitors to nonspecifically block some other processes important to LTP induction. 
Animals with loss of HO2 demonstrate a reduced fear of falling from a suspended wire and greater exploratory behavior in open field testing. These animal-model correlates are consistent with a role for carbon monoxide signaling in anxiety states. Subtle abnormalities on memory have been noted in these HO2 knockout mice, although findings have been inconsistent. As HO2 is abundantly expressed in male testis and penile autonomic ganglia, it is unsurprising that carbon monoxide and nitric oxide both appear to regulate the male reproductive ANS. HO2-deficient mice manifest abnormal neurotransmission of the myenteric plexus and 
muscle 
reflex, 
leading 
to 
ejaculatory 
The expression of HO2 in 
Other Signaling Roles of Carbon Monoxide. 
the hypothalamus led investigators to test whether carbon monoxide could regulate the release of peptide hormones. In animal models, carbon monoxide was found to block the secretion of both oxytocin and vasopressin from the hypothalamus. Cell culture systems have also suggested that carbon monoxide inhibits corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF) release from hypothalamic cells, but near-toxic levels do the reverse, 
stimulating CRF release. 
Heme metabolism and carbon monoxide production appear to be regulated in a circadian fashion, consistent with a role in the regulation of sleep/wake cycles. The mammalian transcription factor NPAS2 binds BMAL1 to form a complex (NPAS2/BMAL1) that, along with Clock/BMAL1, activates transcription of period and cryptochrome proteins. Period and cryptochrome have dual functions, inhibiting the circadian rhythm machinery, but also blocking NPAS2/BMAL1 and Clock/BMAL1, forming a periodic circuit. NPAS2 contains two heme moieties that can bind carbon monoxide, leading to the inhibition of the NPAS2/BMAL1 complex being 

========377========

able to bind to DNA and regulate transcription. 
At toxic levels, carbon monoxide is well known to impair oxygen transport by binding to hemoglobin with higher affinity than oxygen. Amazingly, carbon monoxide itself plays a physiologic role in the mechanism by which the carotid body senses oxygen. HO, expressed in glomus cells of the carotid body, uses oxygen as a substrate in the production of carbon monoxide (Fig. 1.8–6). When oxygen levels drop, so does carbon monoxide production, leading to a resetting of the threshold in which the carotid body senses oxygen. The molecular mechanism may occur via carbon monoxide regulation of the carotid body BK ion channel. 
Neuroprotective Roles of the Heme Oxygenase Pathway. Mice rendered genetically deficient in HO2 manifest increased susceptibility to traumatic brain injury and stroke damage, consistent with a role for the pathway in protecting the brain against neurotoxic insults. The neuroprotective function of HO may be impaired in Alzheimer disease as HO is found in amyloid plaques. The amyloid precursor protein (APP), a source for toxic amyloid beta fragments, can bind to and inhibit HO neuroprotective function, and APP mutants associated with early-onset Alzheimer disease are the most potent at blocking HO function. 
Hydrogen Sulfide: The Newest Gaseous Messenger Molecule 
As carbon monoxide and bilirubin had reputations of toxicity prior to the appreciation of their physiologic functions, a similar tale is unfolding for the gas hydrogen sulfide (chemical formula, H2S). While still abundantly recognized as a foul-smelling and toxic emission of bacteria and sewage treatment plants, hydrogen sulfide may yet prove to be a significant neuromodulator and neurotransmitter. 
At least two different enzymes can generate hydrogen sulfide, cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) and cystathionine gamma-lyase (CSE). Each catalyzes the same reaction, converting cysteine and water to hydrogen sulfide, pyruvate, and ammonia. Intriguingly, each enzyme also catalyzes an independent reaction. CBS converts homocysteine and serine to cystathionine, which CSE uses to produce cysteine, ammonia, and 2- oxobutyric acid. 
In the brain, hydrogen sulfide exists at concentrations as high as 160 micromolar, consistent with a role in regulating brain function. CBS is abundantly expressed in brain, while CSE is undetectable. Similar to the enzymes that generate the other gaseous neurotransmitters, CBS is activated by calcium/calmodulin. CBS-deficient mice have altered hippocampal LTP, and hydrogen sulfide potentiates NMDA receptor currents. While much remains to be discovered, hydrogen sulfide can activate ATP-sensitive potassium channels, dilate arterioles, and increase 

========378========

the activity of the signaling kinase, ERK. 
ENDOCANNABINOIDS: FROM MARIJUANA TO NEUROTRANSMISSION Known as cannabis, hemp, hashish, ma-fen, or a variety of slang terms, marijuana has been cultivated and utilized by human populations for thousands of years. Despite long debates as to whether its risks and benefits are evenly matched, it has only been in recent decades that some of the mystery has been revealed by which marijuana exerts its effects on the brain. The “high” users experience, euphoria and tranquility, relates to cannabis acting upon a neural pathway involving cannabinoids endogenous to the human brain, or endocannabinoids. 
The first described medicinal use of cannabis dates to approximately 2700 B.C. in the pharmacopeia of Chinese Emperor Shen Nung, who recommended its use for a variety of ailments. At this time, adverse properties were also apparent, and a large amount of the fruits of hemp could lead to “seeing devils” or a user might “communicate with spirits and lightens one’s body.” For centuries, cannabis was employed in India as an appetite stimulant, and habitual marijuana users remain well acquainted with “the munchies.” 
For many years, the mechanisms by which the active components of marijuana, cannabinoids, exerted their psychoactive effects remained a mystery. Chemists sought to isolate the psychoactive components of cannabis from the many components of the plant oil (Table 1.8–1). First elucidated in 1940 was cannabinol, a compound now appreciated to be an oxidation product of other cannabinoids and not a psychoactive compound (Fig. 1.8–7). However, with a structure in hand, chemists were now able to synthesize synthetic cannabinoids that did possess psychoactive properties. Within a few years, it was apparent that tetrahydrocannabinols might be the active components of cannabis. Following advances in chemical separation techniques, Mechoulam and Gaoni in 1964 identified delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a compound that accounts for nearly all of the psychoactive effects of cannabis. THC acid is the predominant form of plant THC, and this is readily converted to THC upon heating, such as when cannabis is smoked. 
1899 1940 1964 1988 1990s 
Table 1.8–1. 
Selected Discoveries in Cannabinoid Research 
► Cannabinol isolated from cannabis resin 
► Identification of cannabinol structure 
► Discovery of the structure of THC, the most psychoactive component of cannabis 
► Specific THC-binding sites identified in brain 
► Identification of a brain cannabinoid receptor, CB1 
► Discovery of the first endogenous brain endocannabinoid, anandamide 
► Identification of a second cannabinoid receptor, CB2 

========379========

2000s 
► Rimonabant, a CB1 receptor blocker, is developed 
► Report of a second endocannabinoid, 2-AG 
► FAAH, an endocannabinoid degrading enzyme, is discovered 
► FAAH inhibitors reduce anxiety-like behaviors in animal studies 
► Identification of enzymes that synthesize endocannabinoids 
► MAGL, a second endocannabinoid degrading enzyme, is found 
► Abuse of synthetic cannabinoids is increasingly recognized 
► Rimonabant approved for use in Europe for weight-loss 
► Rimonabant meta-analysis finds increased anxiety and depressive symptoms in 
humans without a history of psychiatric illness 
Discovery of the Brain Endocannabinoid System 
Estimates suggest that 20 to 80 μg of THC reach the brain after one smokes a marijuana cigarette (i.e., “joint”). This is comparable to the 100 to 200 μg of norepinephrine neurotransmitter present in the entire human brain. Thus the effects of THC might be explained by effects upon neurotransmitter systems. In the 1960s, there were at least two schools of thought on how THC exerted its psychoactive effects. One held that THC worked in a manner similar to the inhaled volatile anesthetics, that is, no specific receptor existed and it might have a generalized effect on neuronal membranes or widespread actions upon neurotransmitter receptors. A competing school of thought speculated that specific receptors for cannabinoids existed in the brain, but they were difficult to identify due to the lipophilic nature of these chemicals. Novel cannabinoids were synthesized that were more water soluble, and in the late 1980s, this allowed for the discovery of a specific cannabinoid receptor, named CB1. 
Now that a cannabinoid receptor was known to exist in the brain, the research community felt that it was unlikely that such receptors would have evolved solely to allow for action of plant cannabinoids. Indeed, after Pert and Snyder discovered opiate receptors in the 1970s, it was soon apparent that these did not evolve for the purpose of morphine drugs, but as the targets of the endogenous enkephalin neurotransmitters, discovered soon after. A hunt for an endogenous brain ligand for the CB1 receptor was underway, and the existence of such a substance was hypothesized to be an endogenous cannabinoid. This proved true in 1992 when Mechoulam and colleagues reported the discovery of anandamide, a lipid produced endogenously in the brain that could activate cannabinoid receptors and function as a neurotransmitter (Fig. 1.8–8). The name of this substance was derived from the Sanskrit word, ananda, which translates as bliss. Anandamide could also mimic THC in a variety of animal behavioral tests that generally predict whether a substance will have psychoactive properties in humans, including inhibition of spontaneous movement, promotion of freezing spells, reducing pain sensitivity, and decreasing body temperature. 
Several additional endocannabinoids were soon discovered: 2- 

========380========

arachidonylglycerol (2-AG), N-arachidonyldopamine (NADA), 2- arachidonoylglycerol ether (noladin ether), and virodhamine (Fig. 1.8–8). The reason for having several different endocannabinoids may lie with their differing affinities for the cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2. Anandamide appears to have the greatest selectivity for the CB1 receptor, followed by NADA and noladin ether. In contrast, virodhamine prefers CB2 receptors and has only partial agonist activity at CB1. 2-AG appears not to discriminate between CB1 and CB2. 
Biosynthesis of Endocannabinoids 
Arachidonic acid is utilized as a building block for biosynthesis of endocannabinoids, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes, and is found within cellular phospholipids of the plasma membrane and other intracellular membranes. Synthesis of anandamide requires the sequential action of two enzymes (Fig. 1.8–9). In the first reaction, the enzyme NAT transfers an arachidonic acid side chain from a phospholipid to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), generating NAPE. In the second reaction, the enzyme NAPD-PLD converts NAPE to anandamide. As NAPE is already a natural component of mammalian membranes, it is the second step which generates anandamide that is most crucial to neurotransmission. 

========381========

FIGURE 1.8–7. Selected plant-derived and synthetic cannabinoids. THC is the main psychoactive component of cannabis. The drug rimonabant (Acomplia) is a potent inverse agonist for cannabinoid CB1 receptors. FAAH, fatty acid amide hydrolase. 
Biosynthesis of 2-AG also requires two enzymes. In the first step, a phospholipid containing arachidonic acid at the middle position is converted to sn-1-Acyl-2-arachidonyl glycerol (DAG) via the action of the enzyme PLC. The second reaction generates 2-AG via either of two specific diacylglycerol lipases (DAGLs). The enzymes for biosynthesis of the other endocannabinoids are undefined. 
Endocannabinoids are not stored in synaptic vesicles for later use, but are synthesized on demand as is done for the gaseous neurotransmitters. An important criterion for a signaling molecule to be considered a 

========382========

neurotransmitter is that neuronal depolarization should lead to its release. Depolarization leads to increases in cellular calcium, which in turn promotes synthesis of the endocannabinoids and their release. The mechanism is explained in part by calcium activation of NAPE-PLD and DAGL, leading to augmented biosynthesis of anandamide and 2-AG, respectively. 
Endocannabinoids generated in a neuron must cross the synaptic cleft to act upon cannabinoid receptors. Similar to THC, endocannabinoids are highly lipophilic, and thus poorly soluble in cerebrospinal fluid. It is hypothesized that a specific endocannabinoid transporter exists to allow endocannabinoids to cross the synaptic cleft and allow entry into the target neuron. 

========383========

FIGURE 1.8–8 Endogenous cannabinoids. At least five endocannabinoids exist in the mammalian brain, each differing in affinity for CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors. All are derived from the essential omega-6 fatty acid, arachidonic acid, which is also a substrate in the formation of prostaglandins and leukotrienes. 
Inactivation of Endocannabinoids 
Neurotransmitters are typically inactivated either by reuptake from the 

========384========

neurons that release them or degradation by highly specific enzymes, such as the example of acetylcholine being hydrolyzed by AChE. At least two enzymes exist to target the destruction of endocannabinoids and attenuate their neurotransmission. Fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) converts anandamide to arachidonic acid and ethanolamine (Fig. 1.8–9). FAAH is found in regions of the brain where CB1 receptors are predominant, and localizes to postsynaptic neurons where anandamide is made. Rapid degradation of anandamide in part explains its relatively low potency compared to THC. Confirming a role of FAAH in anandamide inactivation, knockout mice without FAAH exhibit a 15-fold increase of anandamide, but not 2-AG. These mice have greater behavioral responses to exogenous anandamide, owing to its decreased degradation. The endocannabinoid 2- AG is inactivated by FAAH, but also by a MAGL located in presynaptic neurons. 
Pharmacologic inhibitors of FAAH have analgesic effects and reduce anxiety in animal models, but do not have the undesirable effects of THC such as immobility, lowered body temperature or greater appetite. Such a pharmacologic strategy would be analogous to MAOI and catechol o- methyltransferase inhibitors (COMTIs). MAOI, used in depression, inhibit the breakdown of serotonin and other monoamines, thereby increasing serotonin, while COMTI serve an analogous role in blocking the destruction of dopamine and other catecholamines. 
Cannabinoid Receptors 
Underscoring their importance in neural functions, CB1 receptors are possibly the most abundant GPCRs in the brain. They occur at highest density in the basal ganglia, cerebellum, hippocampus, hypothalamus, ACC, and cerebral cortex, particularly the frontal cortex. Humans or animals that receive large doses of THC develop catalepsy, a reduction of spontaneous movement and freezing into bizarre and unnatural postures. The action of cannabinoids in the basal ganglia and cerebellum may be associated these behaviors, which may prove relevant in understanding catatonic symptoms in schizophrenia. 
CB1 receptors are predominantly found on axons and nerve termini, with little present on neuronal dendrites and the cell body. CB1 receptors tend to be localized to the presynaptic rather than postsynaptic side of the neuronal cleft, suggesting a role in regulation of neurotransmission. A second cannabinoid receptor, CB2, is predominantly expressed on the surface of white blood cells of the immune system, but small amounts appear to be present in the brainstem. 
Effects on Neurotransmission. The cannabinoid CB1 receptor is associated with G proteins that mediate its intracellular signaling, in part, through inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. This leads to a decrease in levels of 

========385========

the important second messenger, cAMP. Activation of the CB1 receptor also leads to activation of potassium channels and inhibition of N-type calcium channels. As calcium is integral to neurotransmitter release, cannabinoids can block neurotransmission through this mechanism. Cannabinoid receptors also activate mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK). 
Via the use of cell culture models and slices of brain, cannabinoids have been shown to block the release of a variety of neurotransmitters, including GABA, norepinephrine, and acetylcholine. Norepinephrine and acetylcholine tend to be excitatory neurotransmitters, and cannabinoid inhibition of their release would be expected to have an overall inhibitory effect. However, GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter, and cannabinoid inhibition of it would lead to overall excitatory effects, demonstrating that cannabinoids can have complex effects on neurotransmission depending upon the specific context. Cannabinoids also appear to increase the release of brain endorphin neurotransmitters and increase dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens, a “reward center” relevant to addiction and learning. The endocannabinoids have been implicated in a variety of forms of synaptic plasticity, including LTP and LTD. 
Retrograde Transmission Regulated by Endocannabinoids 
It has long been apparent to neuroscientists that a postsynaptic neuron could regulate the activity of a presynaptic neuron, for instance, inhibiting further release of neurotransmitters by the presynaptic neuron. Endocannabinoids may be the best candidate to date as the retrograde messenger that diffuses from a postsynaptic neuron to act upon a presynaptic neuron. During development, the enzymes responsible for cannabinoid synthesis are expressed in both pre- and postsynaptic neurons. However, in adult brains, the synthesis of endocannabinoids appears to be predominantly in postsynaptic neurons. This suggested that they might work backwards and regulate neurotransmission of a presynaptic neuron. 

========386========

FIGURE 1.8–9. Retrograde neurotransmission of the endocannabinoids, anandamide and 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG). Anandamide (black) is synthesized on demand for neurotransmission via a two-step process. The enzyme NAT transfers the arachidonic acid chain from a phospholipid (APL) to phosphatidyl ethanolamine (PE), producing NAPE. A second enzyme, NAPE-PLD, generates anandamide. 2-AG (black) is similarly synthesized in two steps by the enzymes PLC and DAGL. The endocannabinoids made in a postsynaptic neuron cross the synapse and activate presynaptic CB1 receptors, suppressing neurotransmission of the presynaptic neuron (although activation of the presynaptic neuron occurs in some cases). Enzymes involved in endocannabinoid synthesis are light gray, those that break them down in dark gray. 2-AG is predominantly inactivated in the presynaptic neuron by MAGL, whereas anandamide is destroyed in the postsynaptic neuron by FAAH. PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; APL, arachidonyl phospholipids; NAT, N- acyltransferase; NAPE, N-arachidonyl-phosphatidylethanolamine; NAPE-PLD, N- arachidonyl-phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D; FAAH, Fatty acid amide hydrolase; 

========387========

MAGL, monoacylglycerol lipase; PLC, phospholipase C; PDE, phosphodiesterase; DAG, diacylglycerol; DAGL, diacylglycerol lipase; R1-R3, various acyl or alkyl side chains of phospholipids; R’, side chain of phospholipid head group. 
A typical presynaptic neuron containing dopamine or glutamate releases its neurotransmitter, leading to depolarization of the postsynaptic neuron. This second neuron can release endocannabinoid that diffuses across the synaptic cleft and inhibits further neurotransmitter release from the presynaptic neuron. Such a mechanism has been identified in the rat hippocampus, in which CB1 receptor antagonists block suppression of the presynaptic neuron. Similarly, mice rendered genetically deficient in CB1 receptors lose hippocampal suppression of the presynaptic GABA neurons (a process also known as depolarization-induced suppression of inhibition, or DSI). The reverse has also been demonstrated, as inhibitors of endocannabinoid destruction enhance retrograde neurotransmission in the hippocampus. Endocannabinoids have also been implicated in regulation of other neurotransmission processes, such as LTD and depolarization- induced suppression of excitation (DSE). The ability of endocannabinoids to inhibit neurotransmitter release may be an important general mechanism by which neurotransmission is regulated. 
Endocannabinoids in Anxiety and Mood 
Endocannabinoid neurotransmission may be an important regulator of anxiety, and cannabis users regularly describe a tranquilizing effect of THC. Loss of signaling by the endocannabinoid system appears to promote anxiety-like states in animal studies. CB1 receptor-deficient animals exhibit more pronounced anxiety behavior when exposed to stress or new environs. 
Marsicano and colleagues suggested a role for cannabinoid signaling in forgetting painful memories. A mouse model was employed in which a tone was paired with an electric shock. Typically, when exposed to the tone, mice “freeze” in anticipation of the shock. Once the shock is no longer paired with the tone, animals demonstrate “extinction,” that is, they no longer freeze in response to just the tone by itself. Remarkably, animals deficient in CB1 receptors failed to demonstrate this normal extinction. Thus, endocannabinoid neurotransmission may mediate the ability to “forget” the anxiety associated with a painful memory. CB1 antagonist drugs, given just before the tone, revealed a similar effect. The amygdala participates in many anxiety responses, and endocannabinoids may act upon this brain region to attenuate anxiety. In support of this, levels of anandamide and 2-AG were found to increase in the amygdala immediately following exposure of mice to the tone. 
FAAH knockout mice lack the enzyme that degrades endocannabinoids, and exhibit both increased anandamide levels and reduced anxiety in 

========388========

behavioral tests. Enhancing levels of endocannabinoids may represent a therapeutic target for anxiety. Whereas an agonist might over-activate cannabinoid receptors where little neurotransmission normally occurs, blocking the breakdown of endocannabinoids would be expected to facilitate activity in areas already utilizing these molecules, and thereby having fewer side effects. Novel FAAH inhibitors reduce the breakdown of anandamide and reduce anxiety-like behaviors in animals. Though the “forced swim test” and “tail suspension test” are far from perfect models of depression in the mouse, FAAH inhibitors improved the ability of the animals to cope with these stresses, a benefit also observed by treatment with antidepressant drugs. 
The endocannabinoid pathway may represent an attractive target in understanding posttraumatic stress responses and phobias. Although one cannot yet routinely measure brain endocannabinoid levels in human subjects, this model is supported by clinical trials of the cannabinoid receptor blocker, rimonabant, which may offer promise as a strategy for weight loss (see below). A frequent adverse reaction to the drug is increased anxiety and depression. In a 2007 meta-analysis, Christensen et al. reported that those receiving rimonabant had a 2.5 times greater risk of stopping treatment because of depression and a threefold greater risk of stopping due to anxiety. These psychiatric side effects occurred despite the studies having excluded those who had a history of recurrent depressive or anxiety disorders, underlining an important role for this system in the regulation of anxiety and mood. 
Endocannabinoids may play a role in mood disorders, as cannabis use is associated with a tranquilizing effect upon mood, while some users experience paradoxical anxiety. A postmortem study of depressed suicides found increased CB1 receptors in the prefrontal cortex, also observed in a study of alcoholic suicides. Genetic association studies have sought links between the CB1 receptor and psychiatric illness. While results have been mixed, some have suggested links to depression in Parkinson disease and an association with attention deficit disorder in alcoholic patients. 
Addiction. The endocannabinoid system may be an attractive target for the understanding of addiction. Mice deficient in CB1 receptors are unsurprisingly resistant to the behavioral effects of cannabinoids; however, they also appear to have reduced addiction to and withdrawal from opiates. Further interaction has also been found between the opioid and cannabinoid systems as cannabinoids appear to increase the release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens, a key reward area of the brain implicated in addiction. This dopamine release appears to require mu- opioid receptors, as pharmacologically inhibiting these receptors blocks the ability of cannabinoids to increase dopamine release. Rats with a preference for alcohol have decreased FAAH activity, suggestive of greater 

========389========

cannabinoid signaling. CB1 receptor antagonists dampen their alcohol consumption, while inhibiting FAAH increases their alcohol consumption. Furthermore, CB1-deficient animals also appear to have reduced alcohol intake. A single amino acid mutation in human FAAH has been found to be associated with drug abuse, and this abnormal enzyme appears to be less stable than its wild-type counterpart. 
Endocannabinoids in Psychosis 
Heavy use of cannabis can produce psychotic symptoms in individuals with no prior history of psychiatric disorder, though it is unclear whether this is solely due to the drug or an underlying vulnerability to psychosis in such persons. Cannabis use often worsens psychosis in schizophrenia and heavy use has been associated with developing schizophrenia, although some suggest that this association is an accelerated development of symptoms in those who would eventually manifest schizophrenia. Nonetheless, the endocannabinoid system has implications for the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, as cannabinoid signaling appears to increase the release of dopamine. Medications that act as antagonists of dopamine D2 receptors will likely remain a component of schizophrenia treatment for some time. 
Elevated levels of anandamide have been noted in the CSF from individuals with schizophrenia, including in a follow-up study of medication-naïve patients. Elevated anandamide levels have also been noted in the blood of those with schizophrenia, and such elevations normalized with clinical improvement. 
Elevated CB1 receptor levels have been reported in postmortem brain samples from those with schizophrenia, particularly the DLPFC and cingulate cortex. While some have identified polymorphisms in the CB1 receptors associated with schizophrenia, others found no association. Furthermore, the implications of such polymorphisms on CB1 function are unclear. 
Feeding. Following drug ingestion, THC users develop an increased appetite (“the munchies”), and cannabis has been utilized as an appetite stimulant for centuries. This effect may depend on the CB1 receptors present in the hypothalamus. Endocannabinoid levels increase in the hypothalamus and limbic system when animals are deprived of food. Mice genetically deficient in CB1 receptors become resistant to developing obesity after they are given a high-fat diet. Similarly, the CB1 receptor antagonist rimonabant appears to facilitate weight loss by blocking cannabinoid signaling. In a clinical trial of over 3,000 obese patients, those treated with 20 mg/day of rimonabant lost 6.3 kg at 1 year, compared to 1.6 kg in the placebo group. Nausea was the most common side effect reported. A 2007 meta-analysis of clinical trials reported an overall 4.7 kg weight loss with rimonabant treatment, besting the weight-loss drugs orlistat (2.9 kg) 

========390========

and sibutramine (4.2 kg). 
Effects on Brain Injury and Pain 
In mouse models of traumatic brain injury, 2-AG appears neuroprotective, reducing brain edema, infarct size, and cell death while improving functional outcomes. Anandamide also protected against brain injury in a model of multiple sclerosis, and human patients with the disease have increased production of anandamide. A study of cannabinoid agonist HU- 211 led to more rapid clinical improvement following head trauma. FAAH inhibitors improved motor symptoms in a mouse model of Parkinson disease, likely via cannabinoids increasing dopamine neurotransmission. 
Neurotransmission via the endocannabinoid pathway is increasingly appreciated to regulate pain perception. THC and cannabinoid agonists have proven effective in animal models of acute and chronic pain, ranging from burn injury to nerve damage and inflammation. The CB1 receptor plays an important role in these effects as the analgesic effects of cannabinoid drugs are lost when CB1 antagonist rimonabant is given. Similarly, the analgesic effect of THC is lost in mice genetically deficient in the CB1 receptor. 
Stress has long been associated with diminished pain perception, such as in cases of injured military personnel who demonstrate remarkable pain tolerance, a phenomenon known as stress-induced analgesia. The endocannabinoid system may mediate these effects. Animal models reveal anandamide and 2-AG production after stress, and stress-induced analgesia is blocked by CB1 blocker rimonabant in these animals. In a placebo-controlled, randomized study of over 600 individuals with multiple sclerosis, Zajicek and colleagues found that oral THC administration led to improvement in mobility and pain. However, THC offered little benefit in postoperative pain following hysterectomy. 
Endocannabinoid regulation of pain perception appears to be distinct from that of the endogenous opiate system, but the two pathways may share overlapping neural pathways. Evidence for this has been provided using CB1 blocker rimonabant and naloxone, which blocks opiate receptors. Rimonabant attenuates analgesia provided by THC and cannabinoids, but only partly blocks the response to morphine. However, the opposite is true for opiates: naloxone blocks morphine-induced analgesia but also partially blocks the analgesia of THC and cannabinoid drugs. Combinations of cannabinoid and opiate drugs evince synergistic analgesic effects in animal models. 
Although it was initially assumed that cannabinoids exert their analgesic effects via the CNS, in animal models it has been shown that localized administration of cannabinoids may also be effective, including drugs selective for the CB2 receptor, whose expression is minimal in the CNS. 

========391========

Endocannabinoids may also influence pain sensitivity by mechanisms that do not involve the CB1 and CB2 receptors. Both anandamide and NADA can also activate a calcium channel known as the vanilloid receptor (also known as TRPV-1) found on sensory nerves. This same receptor is notable for being activated by capsaicin, which causes the hot sensation of chili peppers. Thus, endocannabinoids can exert opposing functions: promoting analgesia through the CB1 and CB2 receptors, but potentially increasing pain via TRP channels. While CB2 receptors are largely expressed in the periphery, postmortem analyses reveal an upregulation in brain from those with Alzheimer disease. 
The rapid development of novel cannabinoid drugs may allow for targeting of specific symptoms, rather than elicit all of the typical effects of THC. For instance, ajulemic acid demonstrates analgesic and anti- inflammatory properties, but may offer a benefit of limited psychoactive side effects. In a randomized clinical trial of this compound, ajulemic acid proved efficacious in reducing chronic neuropathic pain. 
Effects in the Periphery 
Cannabinoids lead to direct relaxation of vascular smooth muscle by local CB1 receptors. This vasodilatation extends to the conjunctiva of the eyes, leading to a “bloodshot” appearance in some cannabis users. Relaxation of ocular arteries by cannabinoids may offer utility as a treatment for glaucoma, a condition of high intraocular pressure, and activation of CB1 receptors in the kidney can improve renal blood flow. A role in generalized blood pressure regulation is unproven, and blood pressure is unaltered in persons treated with rimonabant or animals deficient in CB1 receptors. Cannabinoid signaling may also be relevant to ectopic pregnancy, as CB1- deficient mice retain many embryos in the oviduct. 
Nonpsychoactive Cannabinoids 
Although THC is the principal psychoactive component of cannabis, the many nonpsychoactive cannabinoids also have intriguing properties and may regulate neurotransmission. Cannabidiol may offer potential therapeutic effects, and appears to stimulate TRP-V1 receptors and influence endocannabinoid degradation. Cannabidiol also demonstrated a protective effect in a mouse model of inflammatory arthritis and has been purported to have anticonvulsant properties. Although results have been mixed, purified cannabidiol may also exert antipsychotic activity, although the net effect of plant cannabis use typically exacerbates schizophrenia symptoms owing to the THC component. Tetrahydrocannabivarin is a plant cannabinoid that antagonizes CB1 receptors. It is a candidate marker to distinguish whether a patient has been using plant-derived cannabis or prescription THC, which contains no tetrahydrocannabivarin. 

========392========

EICOSANOIDS 
Overview 
Clinical findings suggest that the dietary supplements omega-3 fatty acids- eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), its ester ethyl-eicosapentaenoic acid (E-EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), help relieve symptoms of depression, bipolar illness, schizophrenia, and cognitive impairment. DHA and EPA may help reduce behavioral outburst and improve attention in children. 
Chemistry 
Essential fatty acids are a group of polyunsaturated fats that contain a carbon–carbon double bond in the third position from the methyl end group in the fatty acid chain. They are essential because unlike monosaturated and saturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids cannot be synthesized de novo and can only be acquired through diet from natural fats and oils. Linoleic acid (LA) is the parent compound of omega-6 fatty acids, and α-linolenic acid (ALA) is the parent compound of omega-3 fatty acids. Both omega-3 and omega-6 groups use the same enzymes for desaturation and chain elongation. Omega-3 fatty acids are synthesized by algae and plankton. Fish such as herring, salmon, mackerel, and anchovy feed on these aquatic species and become a rich, dietary source of omega-3. EPA and DHA are highly unsaturated omega-3 fatty acids that contain 6 and 5 double bonds on their long structural chain, respectively. They are positioned in the cell membrane by phospholipids and play a crucial role in cell membrane signaling. 
Effects on Specific Organs and Systems 
The strongest scientific evidence for treatment with fatty acid supplements comes from cardiovascular literature. Several human trials have demonstrated that omega-3 fatty acids lower blood pressure, reduce the rate of recurrent myocardial infarction, and lower triglyceride levels. In the nervous system, fatty acids are essential components of neurons, immune cells, and glial phospholipid membrane structures. They increase CBF, decrease platelet aggregation, and delay progression of atherosclerosis in the cardiovascular system. Omega-6 fatty acids appear to reduce inflammation and neuronal apoptosis, and decrease phosphatidylinositol second-messenger activity. Omega-3 fatty acids have been suggested to alter gene expression. 
In the CNS, fatty acids are selectively concentrated in neuronal membranes and involved in cell membrane structure. Omega-6 arachidonic acid has been shown to enhance glutamate neurotransmission, stimulate stress hormone secretion, and trigger glial cell activation in the setting of oxidative toxicity and neurodegeneration. The omega-3 fatty acids DHA 

========393========

and EPA appear to protect neurons from inflammatory and oxidative toxicities. Increases in serotonin, enhancement of dopamine, and regulation of corticotrophin-releasing factor have been demonstrated in cell culture models. 
In rodent models of depression, chronic EPA treatment normalized behavior in open-field tests. Serotonin and norepinephrine were also increased in the limbic regions. Mice fed Omega-3-poor diets had reduced memory, altered learning patterns, and more behavioral problems. 
Therapeutic Indications 
Clinical research with the use of fish oil for mood disorders has been based on epidemiology studies where there appears to be negative correlation between fish consumption and depressive symptoms. Countries with lower per capita fish consumption had up to 60 times increased rates of major depression, bipolar disorder, and postpartum depression. Observational studies concluded that the lower incidence of seasonal affective disorder (SAD) in Iceland and Japan-than latitude predicted is related to the amount of fatty acid these populations consume in their diet. A study in Norway showed that use of cod-liver oil decreased depressive symptoms. Depression after a myocardial infarction shows higher arachidonic acid to EPA ratio. Postmortem studies in brains of patients diagnosed with MDD show reduced DHA in the orbitofrontal cortex. 
The first randomized, controlled pilot study of omega-3 fatty acids focused on adjunctive treatment in both bipolar and unipolar patients with depression, in addition to their standard lithium or VPA treatment. The omega-3 fatty acid group had significant improvement on the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and a longer period of remission than the placebo group. A subsequent larger study supported a benefit from treatment with E-EPA for bipolar illness. However, a study group of patients with either bipolar disorder or rapid cycling treated with E-EPA showed no significant difference on any outcome measure between the EPA and placebo groups. Bleeding time was also increased in the treatment group. There is no current data on monotherapy in bipolar illness or depression. 
In 2002, two landmark double-blind, placebo-controlled studies showed that supplementation with E-EPA or DHA, in addition to standard treatment for unipolar depression, led to a significant reduction in Hamilton Depression Rating scores. A later study with longer duration and a larger number of subjects failed to see an effect of EPA and DHA supplementation on depressed mood or on cognitive function, but also found no adverse effects from the supplements. Although meta-analysis shows significant antidepressant efficacy of omega-3 fatty acids, the authors recognize publication bias and heterogeneity. More large-scale, well-controlled trials are needed to find out the favorable target subjects, therapeutic dose of EPA, and the composition of omega-3 P in treating 

========394========

depression. 
Limited consumption of seafood during pregnancy is recommended in American guidelines, but Japanese studies suggest that low DHA but not EPA increased risk for post-partum depression. A randomized trial of omega-3 fatty acids as monotherapy for MDD during pregnancy showed a reduction in Hamilton Depression Rating scores and compliance with treatment compared to the control group. 
The most convincing evidence comes from early brain development and learning studies. Pregnant mothers who consumed foods rich in DHA gave birth to infants that had improved problem-solving skill, but not necessarily improved memory. Visual acuity and eye development are also associated with DHA supplementation during pregnancy. 
The Oxford-Durham study of dietary supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids in children with developmental coordination disorder suggests a potentially controversial role in learning disabilities, ADHD, and autism. The authors saw significant reductions in inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. The crossover placebo group improved after switching to fish oil supplements and a multivitamin showed no additional benefits for ADHD symptoms. This led to a plan by education officials in the Durham County Council in England to spend £1 million on omega-3 fish oils to help 5,000 children as they approach their school placement exams in order help to improve their performance. 
In behavioral studies, prisoners in England that consumed higher amounts of seafood containing omega-3 fatty acids saw a decrease in the assault rates. A Finnish study of violent criminals identified lower levels of omega-3 fatty acids in their system compared to the nonviolent offenders. 
The negative and psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia may be improved with supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids. Antipsychotic medications such as haloperidol appear to have fewer extrapyramidal side effects when combined with antioxidants and omega-3 fatty acids. 
EPA and DHA have been associated with decreased dementia incidence. After reviewing the Rotterdam study of a longitudinal cohort of over 5,300 patients, fish consumption appeared to be inversely related to development of new cases of dementia. A later analysis of the study after 6 years demonstrated that low intake of omega-3 fatty acids was not associated with increased risk of dementia. In contrast, the Zutphen study, also in the Netherlands, concluded that fish consumption was inversely related to cognitive decline at both 3 years and after 5 years. Well-designed clinical trials are needed before omega-3 fatty acids can be recommended for prevention of cognitive impairment. 
Precautions and Adverse Reactions 
The most adverse complication is increased risk of bleeding. Dietary sources can contain heavy metals, and there is no standard preparation for 

========395========

capsule formulations. Treatment studies have yielded a variety of different doses, but evidence for the therapeutic dose and clinical guidelines are almost nonexistent. The length of treatment still needs to be determined. 
NEUROSTEROIDS 
Background 
While steroids are critical for the maintenance of body homeostasis, neurosteroids are synthesized from cholesterol in the brain and independent of peripheral formation in the adrenals and gonads. Neurosteroids are produced by a sequence of enzymatic processes governed by P450 and non-P450 enzymes either within or outside the mitochondria of several types of CNS and PNS cells. 
Recent work has shown that neurosteroids can operate through a nongenomic pathway to regulate neuronal excitability via their effects on neurotransmitter-gated ion-channels. Receptors are generally located in the nucleus, membrane, or microtubules of the CNS and PNS. Although steroids and neurosteroids may act on the same nuclear receptors, neurosteroids differ from steroids in their topological distribution and regional synthesis. The most well-known effect of neurosteroids is on the GABA receptor, particularly the GABAA receptor. Neurosteroids acting primarily at this site include allopregnanolone (3α5α tetrahydroprogesterone), pregnenolone (PREG), and tetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone (THDOC). Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), the most prevalent neurosteroid, acts as a noncompetitive modulator of GABA, and its precursor dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) has also been shown to exert inhibitory effects at the GABA receptor. Some neurosteroids may also act at the NMDA, alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5- methyl-4-isoxazole-propanoic acid (AMPA), kainate, glycine, serotonin, sigma type-1, and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Progesterone is also considered a neurosteroid and has the ability to regulate gene expression at progesterone receptors. 
Neurosteroids in Neurodevelopment and Neuroprotection 
In general, neurosteroids stimulate axonal growth and promote synaptic transmission. Specific neuroprotective effects are unique to each neurosteroid. DHEA acts to regulate brain serotonin and dopamine levels, suppress cortisol, increase hippocampal primed burst potentiation and cholinergic function, decrease amyloid β protein, inhibit the production of proinflammatory cytokines, and prevent free radical scavenging. DHEA and DHEA-S have both been shown to have a role in glial development and neuronal growth, and to promote their survival in animals; their injection into the brains of mice promoted long-term memory while reversing amnesia. Progesterone is linked to myelinating processes such as aiding in 

========396========

the repair of damaged neural myelination. Allopregnanolone contributes to the reduction of contacts during axonal regression. 
Role of Neurosteroids in Mental Illness 
Neurosteroids have distinct implications for the maintenance of normal 
neurologic 
function 
and 
may 
also 
contribute 
to 
neuropathology. 
Neurosteroids are differentially regulated in males and females, and may impact the manifestation of psychological disorders in these two populations. Specifically, they play a distinct role in depression and anxiety disorders, and may be targeted by psychiatric medications in the near 
future. 
Depression. 
When compared with nondepressed controls, studies show that depressed patients have lower plasma and CSF concentrations of allopregnanolone; additionally, this research has elucidated an inverse relationship between allopregnanolone concentrations and severity of depressive illness. However, there are no allopregnanolone-based therapies available for humans, so their direct efficacy is unsubstantiated. Antidepressant drugs, specifically fluoxetine, have been shown in multiple studies to increase the levels of certain neurosteroids. Nonetheless, there is debate over the therapeutic properties of neurosteroids, prompting the investigation of neurosteroid concentrations in patients undergoing nonpharmacological therapies. Preliminary results indicate that the lack of 
modifications 
in 
neurosteroid 
levels 
during 
nonpharmacological 
treatments supports the validity of the pharmacological properties of antidepressants, not their therapeutic action, in the elevation of neurosteroid levels in medicated populations. In a 2006 clinical study with mirtazapine, allopregnanolone concentrations increased in patients with MDD regardless of the therapeutic benefit. 
Anxiety Disorders. 
In patients with anxiety disorders, the major mechanism of action is on the GABA receptor. Homeostasis characterized by normal GABAergic activity is restored after panic attacks as neurosteroids are released in response to stress. Allopregnanolone 
stimulates 
GABAergic 
activity 
with 
20 
times 
the 
strength 
of 
benzodiazepines and 200 times the potency of barbiturates. The positive and negative regulation of the GABAA receptor is correlated with anxiolytic 
and anxiogenic action, respectively. 
Psychotic Disorders. 
contribute 
to 
psychotic, 
substance abuse, 
eating, 
and 
In addition to their primary relevance to the pharmacological treatment of mood and anxiety disorders, neurosteroids 
childhood, 
postpartum disorders. The effect of neurosteroids on psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia is mediated by DHEA and DHEA-S. DHEA has been 

========397========

dispensed to decrease anxiety in schizophrenics, as DHEA and DHEA-S suppress GABA inhibition and heighten the neuronal response at the NMDA and sigma receptors. DHEA and DHEA-S levels are typically elevated in schizophrenics’ initial episode, indicating neurosteroids are upregulated by the onset of psychosis. Because neurosteroids levels are studied across various illness stages, some questions still exist regarding the role of neurosteroids in psychosis. 
Attention Deficit Disorder. In children, the clinical symptoms of ADHD are inversely correlated with DHEA and pregnenolone levels. 
Substance Abuse. Alcohol is theorized to regulate the GABA receptor and induce de novo steroid synthesis in the brain; specifically pregnenolone, allopregnanolone, and allotetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone levels are increased in the brain and periphery in response to increases in peripheral alcohol levels. It is hypothesized that sharp increases in ethanol concentration may mimic the acute stress response and elevate neurosteroid concentrations by the HPA axis. To prevent ethanol dependence, researchers are investigating fluctuations in neurosteroids levels and in vivo neurosteroid responsiveness. Neurosteroids (increased allopregnanolone levels in particular) are associated with drug abuse. However, DHEA-S may actually check the acquisition of morphine tolerance. Past research has shown DHEA-S levels were also increased in patients who abstained from cocaine use as per a treatment program, and as patients relapsed, DHEA-S concentrations decreased accordingly. 
Eating Disorders. With regard to eating disorders, DHEA has been shown to diminish food intake, temper obesity, moderate insulin resistance, and lower lipids in rats with a model of youth-onset, hyperphagic, genetic obesity. By regulating the serotonergic system, DHEA is hypothesized to promote a reduced caloric load. Although hypothetical, low levels of DHEA and DHEA-S are recorded in young women with anorexia nervosa, and 3 months of oral DHEA supplementation increased bone density and tempered the emotional problems associated with the disorder. 
Postpartum and Gynecological Disorders. As estrogen and progesterone levels fluctuate during the course of pregnancy and drop markedly after delivery, neurosteroids are thought to contribute to postpartum disorders. Low postpartum DHEA concentrations have been linked to mood instability. In addition, allopregnanolone levels correlated with mood disorders during pregnancy and in pre-menstrual syndrome (PMS). It has been noted that women with pre-menstrual dysphoric disorder have higher allopregnanolone/progesterone ratios than normal controls; women 

========398========

treated for this disorder reported improvement as allopregnanolone levels deceased. 
Neurosteroids, Memory Disorders, and Aging. Neurosteroid levels may be irregular in neurodegenerative disorders and aging conditions such as Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases. DHEA levels at age 70 are only about 20 percent of their maximum value recorded in the late twenties, and some researchers believe DHEA supplementation can prevent or slow the cognitive declines associated with the aging process. However, conflicting studies have indicated that DHEA administration does not improve cognitive measures in patients. Additionally, in patients with Alzheimer disease, DHEA concentrations have been found to be markedly decreased. 
Conclusion 
Neurosteroids may play a role in a variety of psychiatric pathologies. Breakthroughs with animal models do not always correlate with advances in understanding the role of neurosteroids in humans, complicating research. Moreover, further research is exploring neurosteroid levels over the treatment course of a diverse array of psychiatric illnesses to get a more complete picture of disease management. 
NOVEL NEUROTRANSMITTERS: BEYOND THE CLASSICAL DEFINITION OF NEUROTRANSMITTER 
The classical criteria for a chemical to be consider a neurotransmitter were (a) synthesis in a presynaptic neuron, (b) storage and release from a presynaptic neuron, (c) binding to a receptor on a postsynaptic membrane, and (d) removal from the synaptic cleft by reuptake or degradation. Within the past few decades the discovery of novel neurotransmitters has led to a reformulation of these strict criteria. Messengers such as the gases, cannabinoids, and eicosanoids are not stored in vesicles in presynaptic neurons, but appear to be generated and released “on demand.” The endocannabinoids appear to have an important role as retrograde messengers, being released from a conventional postsynaptic neuron and acting upon a presynaptic neuron (Fig. 1.8–9). Finally, the gases do not act upon a receptor on the extracellular membrane of a postsynaptic neuron, but diffuse into the cell and act directly upon multiple cellular proteins, bypassing membrane receptors entirely. Additional, yet undiscovered, chemical messengers may further refine the concept of what a neurotransmitter is. 
REFERENCES 
Appleton KM, Sallis HM, Perry R, Ness AR, Churchill R. Omega-3 fatty acids for depression in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(11):CD004692. 

========399========

Cutajar MC, Edwards TM. Evidence for the role of endogenous carbon monoxide in memory processing. J Cogn Neurosci. 2007;19:557–562. 
Deng J, Lei C, Chen Y, et al. Neuroprotective gases–fantasy or reality for clinical use? Prog Neurobiol. 2014;115:210–245. 
Di Marzo V, Stella N, Zimmer A. Endocannabinoid signalling and the deteriorating brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015;16:30–42. 
Grosso G, Galvano F, Marventano S, et al. Omega-3 fatty acids and depression: scientific evidence and biological mechanisms. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2014;2014:313570. 
*Iseger TA, Bossong MG. A systematic review of the antipsychotic properties of cannabidiol in humans. Schizophrenia Research. 2015;162:153–161. 
Iversen LL. The Science of Marijuana. Oxford University Press; 2008. 
Joy CB, Mumby-Croft R, Joy LA. Polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006:CD001257. 
Keck PE Jr, Mintz J, McElroy SL, et al. Double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trials of ethyl-eicosapentanoate in the treatment of bipolar depression and rapid cycling bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;60:1020–1022. 
Kidd PM. Omega-3 DHA and EPA for cognition, behavior, and mood: clinical findings and structural-functional synergies with cell membrane phospholipids. Altern Med Rev. 2007;12:207–227. 
Kreitzer AC, Malenka RC. Endocannabinoid-mediated rescue of striatal LTD and motor deficits in Parkinson’s disease models. Nature. 2007;445:643–647. 
Longone P, Rupprecht R, Manieri GA, Bernardi G, Romeo E, Pasini A. The complex roles of neurosteroids in depression and anxiety disorders. Neurochem Int. 2008;52:596–601. Lynch AM, Loane DJ, Minogue AM, et al. Eicosapentaenoic acid confers neuroprotection in the amyloid-beta challenged aged hippocampus. Neurobiol Aging. 2007;28:845–855. 
*Maccarrone M, Guzman M, Mackie K, Doherty P, Harkany T. Programming of neural cells by (endo)cannabinoids: from physiological rules to emerging therapies. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2014;15:786–801. 
Mazier W, Saucisse N, Gatta-Cherifi B, Cota D. The endocannabinoid system: Pivotal orchestrator of obesity and metabolic disease. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2015;26:524–537. *McEwen BS, Bowles NP, Gray JD, et al. Mechanisms of stress in the brain. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18:1353–1363. 
Mifflin K, Benson C, Kerr B, et al. Involvement of neuroactive steroids in pain, depression and anxiety. Mod Trends Pharmacopsychiatri. 2015;30:94–102. 
*Mischoulon D, Freeman MP. Omega-3 fatty acids in psychiatry. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2013;36:15–23. 
Moncada S, Bolanos JP. Nitric oxide, cell bioenergetics and neurodegeneration. J Neurochem. 2006;97:1676–1689. 
Nemets H, Nemets B, Apter A, Bracha Z, Belmaker RH. Omega-3 treatment of childhood depression: a controlled, double-blind pilot study. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:1098–1100. Paul BD, Snyder SH. H2 S: A Novel Gasotransmitter that Signals by Sulfhydration. Trends Biochem Sci. 2015;40:687–700. 
Pi-Sunyer FX, Aronne LJ, Heshmati HM, Devin J, Rosenstock J. Effect of rimonabant, a 

========400========

cannabinoid-1 receptor blocker, on weight and cardiometabolic risk factors in overweight or obese patients: RIO-North America: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2006;295:761–775. Porter J, Van Vrancken M, Corll C, Thompson H, Svec F. The influence of dehydroepiandrosterone and 8-OH-DPAT on the caloric intake and hypothalamic neurotransmitters of lean and obese Zucker rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2005;288:R928–R935. 
Renard J, Krebs MO, Le-Pen G, Jay TM. Long-term consequences of adolescent cannabinoid exposure in adult psychopathology. Frontiers Neuroscience. 2014;8:361. 
Richardson AJ, Montgomery P. The Oxford-Durham study: a randomized, controlled trial of dietary supplementation with fatty acids in children with developmental coordination disorder. Pediatrics. 2005;115:1360–1366. 
Rogers PJ, Appleton KM, Kessler D, et al. No effect of n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (EPA and DHA) supplementation on depressed mood and cognitive function: a randomised controlled trial. Br J Nutr. 2008;99:421–431. 
Rubino T, Parolaro D. The impact of exposure to cannabinoids in adolescence: Insights from animal models. Biol Psychiatry. 2016;79(7):578–585. 
Schule C, Romeo E, Uzunov DP, et al. Influence of mirtazapine on plasma concentrations of neuroactive steroids in major depression and on 3alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity. Mol Psychiatry. 2006;11:261–272. 
Sedlak TW, Snyder SH. Messenger molecules and cell death: Therapeutic implications. JAMA. 2006;295:81–89. 
Song C, Shieh CH, Wu YS, Kalueff A, Gaikwad S, Su KP. The role of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids in the treatment of major depression and Alzheimer’s disease: acting separately or synergistically? Prog Lipid Res. 2016;62:41–54. Strous RD, Maayan R, Weizman A. The relevance of neurosteroids to clinical psychiatry: from the laboratory to the bedside. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2006;16:155–169. 
Su KP, Huang SY, Chiu TH, et al. Omega-3 fatty acids for major depressive disorder during pregnancy: results from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2008;69:644–651. 
Sulaieva O, Wallace JL. Gaseous mediator-based anti-inflammatory drugs. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2015;25:1–6. 
Vincent SR. Nitric oxide neurons and neurotransmission. Prog Neurobiol. 2010;90:246–255. *Volk DW, Lewis DA. The role of endocannabinoid signaling in cortical inhibitory neuron dysfunction in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 2016;79(7):595–603. 
▲ 1.9 Intraneuronal Signaling 
JOHN A. GRAY, M.D., PH.D., AND BRYAN L. ROTH, M.D., PH.D. 
OVERVIEW OF NEURONAL SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION 
Signal transduction is the process by which a cell converts extracellular signals to intracellular signals and the subsequent cascade of events that 

========401========

leads to alterations in cellular function. The initial step in signal transduction usually involves the binding of an extracellular signal, such as a neurotransmitter, to a designated plasma membrane receptor. Binding of this molecule, or ligand, to its receptor stabilizes a unique conformation of the receptor, resulting in the transmission of the signal across the plasma membrane. In its simplest form, the binding of a neurotransmitter to an ion channel stabilizes a conformation of the channel protein that allows the channel to open and ions to flow into or out of the cell, setting off a cascade of intracellular events. In more complex examples of signal transduction, the stabilized conformation of the receptor allows for the binding of other proteins to the intracellular portions of the receptor. These intracellular proteins subsequently become “activated” and go on to initiate various downstream events. 
Before the details of each signaling pathway are discussed, it is useful to understand the common themes in the flow of information from receptor binding to the final alterations in neuronal function. In general, these systems are organized into several layers (Fig. 1.9–1). First, extracellular signals are detected by receptors and transmitted across the plasma membrane to adaptor proteins. These adaptor proteins then activate one or more intracellular signaling pathways, which, in turn, alter the function of effector proteins, either directly or via intermediates, such as protein kinases. A protein kinase is an enzyme that adds a phosphate group to a protein. Protein phosphorylation is a primary mechanism in signal transduction as phosphorylation changes a protein’s conformation, which can alter its enzymatic activity or its ability to bind with other proteins. Typically, protein phosphorylation leads to the activation of a protein. The eventual outcome of these signaling pathways is the alteration of neuronal activity and changes in the expression of various genes. 

========402========

FIGURE 1.9–1. General outline of signal transduction. Transmission of an extracellular signal to an intracellular signal usually involves the binding of a ligand, such as a neurotransmitter, to a receptor. Conformational changes in the receptor protein transmits the signal across the plasma membrane to adaptor proteins which then activate one or more intracellular signaling pathways. These signaling pathways often involve the generation of small-molecule second messengers or the activation of kinase cascades leading to changes in neuronal function and gene expression. 
So why do neurons and other cells have these complex intracellular signaling pathways? First, in addition to transmitting an extracellular signal across the plasma membrane, these signal transduction pathways amplify the signal exponentially, allowing for cells to have large responses to very minute quantities of extracellular stimuli. Furthermore, the multiplicity of intracellular signaling pathways allows signals to be directed in a specific manner, thus enabling cells to maintain separate channels of information that can be integrated only when appropriate. For example, these separate channels of information allow neurons to detect when different stimuli are presented concurrently, thus enabling them to alter their response accordingly. Additionally, each signaling pathway has distinctive spatial and temporal characteristics that allow for the optimal handling of different types of information. For example, in some instances 

========403========

it may be advantageous for a neuron to have extremely high sensitivity to an uncommon stimulus but to ignore repetitive inputs. Thus, these complex signaling pathways determine a neuron’s sensitivity and responsiveness to its environment in the context of its current circumstances and its past experiences. 
Overall, a detailed understanding of the complex biochemical processes operating inside neurons is critical to appreciate how the brain not only responds to individual stimuli but also how it can continuously adapt to endless environmental changes. In addition, advances in the understanding of the molecular processes occurring within neurons will lead to improved insight into the basis of behavior and psychotropic drug action and will likely guide the development of improved psychiatric treatments and diagnostic tools. 
FIGURE 1.9–2.Outlineofthethreemajorreceptortypesmediatingintraneuronalsignal transduction in neurons: ligand-gated ion channels, G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), and receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Each receptor type, when activated by its extracellular signal, induces intracellular signaling pathways that result in alterations of neuronal function. G, heterotrimeric G protein. 
Major Neuronal Signaling Pathways 
There are three main schemes of signal transduction in neurons (Fig. 1.9– 2). The first, which will be discussed in more detail in Section 1.10, involves ligand-gated ion channels. Ligand-gated ion channels are the primary mechanism of signal transduction for amino acid neurotransmitters such as glutamate and GABA. In addition, a number of other neurotransmitters, including acetylcholine and serotonin, have a subset of receptors that are 

========404========

ligand-gated ion channels. Upon binding of neurotransmitter, these ion channels are stabilized in a conformation that alters the conductance of the channel to particular ions, usually Na+, K+, Ca2+, or Cl−. At synapses, these receptors can very quickly convert an extracellular signal into a postsynaptic electrical signal constituting so-called “fast synaptic transmission.” A prototypical example of a ligand-gated ion channel is the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, which consists of five protein subunits with two binding sites for acetylcholine enclosing a central aqueous pore. When both acetylcholine binding sites are filled, the internal pore of the channel opens, allowing Na+ ions to flow into the cell, down their electrochemical gradient. Channels that allow Ca2+ to enter the cell can have effects on the electrical properties of the cell and can stimulate additional calcium-mediated intracellular signaling cascades as discussed below. 
A second primary scheme of neuronal signal transduction involves the binding of a neurotransmitter to seven-transmembrane-domain receptors. These receptors are also known as GPCRs because they activate heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins). GPCRs represent the single largest family of receptors (with more than 700 members) in the genome and are the primary form of receptor for many of the neurotransmitters, including serotonin and dopamine. GPCRs primarily signal by activating G proteins that subsequently activate effector enzymes that generate small molecules termed “second messengers” (the “first messenger” being the extracellular signal itself). Second messengers in turn mediate many of the downstream intracellular signaling cascades, largely involving protein kinases. Because of the additional step of creating small-molecule second messengers, signaling through GPCRs generally requires more time to develop than the opening of a ligand-gated ion channel, and thus this scheme accounts for the majority of “slow synaptic transmission” in neurons. 
The third common scheme of signal transduction in the brain involves the activation of a distinct class of protein kinases that phosphorylate proteins on tyrosine residues. Activation of these protein tyrosine kinases is the primary signaling pathway for most neurotrophic factors, such as NGF and BDNF, as well as various cytokines and chemokines. The binding of a neurotrophic factor or chemokine to its respective plasma membrane receptor leads to the dimerization of the receptor with another copy of the receptor transmitting the signal across the plasma membrane. This results in the activation of a cascade of protein kinases. In some cases, the intracellular portion of the receptor itself contains the first tyrosine kinase in the cascade, and in other cases the dimerized receptors recruit cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases that then become activated. While the cascades of kinases can be complicated, the ultimate purpose is to amplify the initial signal and affect numerous changes in neuronal function. 

========405========

G-PROTEIN–COUPLED RECEPTOR SIGNALING 
Accounting for at least 2 percent of the genes in the genome, GPCRs comprise a very large family of proteins that represent targets for a wide array of molecules ranging from hormones and neurotransmitters to odorants and even light. The binding of an agonist to its cognate GPCR stabilizes an active conformation of the receptor, inducing the dissociation and activation of a receptor-specific heterotrimeric G protein into its α- and βγ-subunits (Fig. 1.9–3). G proteins were discovered by Alfred Gilman, Martin Rodbell, and colleagues and are a family of proteins named because they use the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a molecular “switch” to regulate cell processes. In their baseline state, G proteins are heterotrimeric proteins consisting of α-, β-, and γ-subunits, with a GDP molecule bound to the α-subunit. When a GPCR is activated by an agonist, the G-protein α-subunit becomes associated with the receptor, causing conformational changes that release the GDP molecule. This allows a GTP molecule to bind, thus activating the α-subunit. GTP binding to the α-subunit also causes the dissociation of the α-subunit from the βγ-subunits and from the receptor. These dissociated subunits are now biologically active and activate or inhibit a number of downstream effectors, such as nucleotide cyclases, phospholipases, and kinases, resulting in a variety of downstream cellular effects. The system is returned to its basal state when the α-subunit, which has intrinsic GTPase activity, hydrolyzes the GTP back to GDP. This hydrolysis of GTP to GDP within the α-subunit also leads to the reassociation of the α-subunit with the βγ-subunits and thus restoration of the inactive heterotrimer. If the receptor remains bound to its agonist, then the GDP can again dissociate from the α-subunit and another G-protein cycle begins; however, if the receptor becomes inactive, the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP halts intracellular signaling. 

========406========

FIGURE 1.9–3.OutlineofG-proteinfunction.Underbasalconditions,Gproteinsexistas heterotrimers consisting of single α-, β-, and γ-subunits, with the inactive α-subunits bound to GDP. After the G-protein–coupled receptor is activated by its ligand, it causes the associated G protein to release GDP, allowing GTP to bind. GTP binding to the α-subunit causes the dissociation of the α-subunit from the βγ-subunits and from the receptor. The free G-protein subunits are functionally active and can activate and regulate a variety of downstream effector proteins. The α-subunit has intrinsic GTPase activity that hydrolyzes the GTP back to GDP, causing the reassociation of the α- and βγ-subunit, restoring the system to its basal state. 
The primary effector systems mediated by G proteins share a common overall form, whereby the activated G protein activates an effector enzyme that generates small-molecule second messengers that then initiate specific protein kinase cascades. The particular class of G proteins associated with each individual receptor dictates which specific second messenger system is activated. The four major classes of G proteins that are involved in neurotransmitter-mediated signaling are called Gs, Gi, Gq, and G12/13 and are discussed below with the details of each second messenger system. Briefly, both the Gs and Gi classes of G proteins regulate the cAMP system, while the Gq class regulates the phosphoinositide signaling system. The G12/13 class modulates Rho/Rac signaling cascades but will not be discussed. Importantly, a single receptor can activate multiple G proteins, which can then activate multiple effector enzymes that synthesize many second messenger molecules, leading to an exponential amplification of the 

========407========

initial signal. 
Cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate Pathway 
The discovery of cAMP in the 1950s by Earl Sutherland and Theodore Rall established the concept that small intracellular molecules can act as second messengers that convey information from cell-surface receptors to their targets within the cell. Since that seminal discovery, decades of intensive research on the cAMP system has elucidated its operating principles, making it the prototypical second messenger system. 
GPCRs that activate the cAMP signaling pathway are coupled to the Gs class of G proteins. When Gs becomes activated by a receptor, it dissociates from the receptor and stimulates a membrane-bound effector enzyme called adenylate cyclase that converts ATP to cAMP (Fig. 1.9–4). Conversely, other receptors are coupled to the Gi class of G proteins that inhibit adenylate cyclase and thus decrease cAMP production. The net level of cAMP production by a given neurotransmitter is thus determined by the specific Gs- and Gi-coupled receptor subtypes expressed on a given neuron or synapse. For example, norepinephrine stimulates adenylate cyclase via its interaction with β-adrenergic receptors and inhibits adenylate cyclase via stimulation of α2-adrenergic receptors. 
The major target of action of cAMP in most cells is the cAMP-dependent protein kinase, also known as protein kinase A (PKA), which mediates many of the actions cAMP has on neuronal function. PKA is a multisubunit serine/threonine kinase consisting of two regulatory subunits and two catalytic subunits. In the absence of cAMP, the regulatory subunits are bound to the catalytic subunits, thus keeping the kinase inactive. However, when cAMP is present, it binds to the regulatory subunits, thus causing a conformation change that dissociates the regulatory subunits from the catalytic subunits. The release of the regulatory subunits activates the catalytic subunits, which are then free to phosphorylate various cellular proteins on serine and threonine residues. This kinase has a broad range of substrate proteins involved in regulating virtually every aspect of neuronal function. In particular, several important neuronal targets for PKA have been identified, including various ion channels, synaptic vesicle machinery, neurotransmitter synthetic enzymes, and proteins involved in regulating gene transcription. Thus, alterations in cAMP levels are able to affect neuronal function over a broad range of time scales. For example, rapid effects are achieved by targeting ion channel gating and neurotransmitter release machinery, while slower effects occur with the targeting of neurotransmitter synthesis and cellular energy metabolism. Furthermore, cAMP elicits longer-lasting changes in neuronal function by controlling the expression of specific target genes. 

========408========

FIGURE 1.9–4. Basic organization of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) signaling pathway. Production of cAMP from ATP by adenylate cyclase can either be stimulated or inhibited by G-protein–coupled receptors. Receptors coupled to the G- protein Gs stimulate cAMP synthesis whereas those coupled to Gi inhibit adenylate cyclase. Many of the cellular actions mediated by cAMP occur through protein kinase A (PKA), which exists at baseline as a tetramer of two regulatory subunits (R) that tonically inhibit two catalytic subunits (C). When the R subunits become bound by cAMP, they dissociate from the C subunits, which become activated and can phosphorylate multiple cellular proteins. One such target is the transcription factor cAMP response element binding (CREB) protein, which, when activated by PKA, can bind to DNA sequences called cAMP response elements (CREs) and promote gene transcription. 
One important substrate of PKA is a transcription factor that enables elevations in cAMP to regulate gene expression. This transcription factor, called CREB protein, regulates the expression of various genes by binding to short deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences called cAMP response elements (CREs). Phosphorylation of CREB by PKA activates it, thus allowing it to bind to CRE sequences in the regulatory regions of target genes where it increases or decreases the transcription of certain genes. 

========409========

Proteins whose expression is regulated by cAMP through CREB are thought to be involved in various neuronal processes, including neuronal development and survival and the formation of long-term memories. 
Termination of cAMP signaling is mediated by the actions of phosphodiesterases (PDEs), enzymes that cleave cAMP to AMP. There are multiple isoforms of PDEs expressed throughout the brain that are differentially regulated, adding a level of complexity to the precise cellular control of cAMP signaling. At high concentrations, caffeine nonselectively inhibits phosphodiesterases, possibly contributing to some of its pharmacologic effects. In addition, considerable efforts have been made to develop PDE inhibitors that are selective for individual isoforms. For example, rolipram, an inhibitor selective for type IV PDEs, initially showed promise as an antidepressant but was limited due to side effects. In addition, PDE10A is a recently identified isoform expressed at high levels in the brain, and PDE10A inhibitors have been shown to antagonize the effects of both amphetamine and phencyclidine in rodents, thus suggesting antipsychotic potential. 
Phosphatidylinositol Pathway 
After the discovery of the cAMP system, it became apparent that there were many neurotransmitter receptors that did not act via cAMP, suggesting the possible existence of other second messenger systems. Beginning in the 1950s, there were hints that phosphoinositides (PIs) may be involved in various cellular pathways, though a coherent view of this second messenger system did not emerge until the early 1980s. The phosphatidylinositol signaling pathway parallels many basic aspects of the cAMP system (Fig. 1.9–5), though it also includes several unique features. The phosphatidylinositol signaling pathway is initiated by receptors that are coupled to the Gq class of G proteins, which activate the effector enzyme PLC. This enzyme cleaves phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2), an inositol-containing phospholipid located in the cytoplasmic leaf of the plasma membrane, into two second messengers, DAG and inositol trisphosphate (IP3). These two second messengers can then go on to affect distinct cellular pathways. 

========410========

FIGURE 1.9–5.Basicorganization of the phosphatidylinositol signaling pathway. The Gq class of G proteins activates phospholipase C (PLC), which cleaves the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2) into two second messengers, diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol trisphosphate (IP3). IP3 diffuses to the endoplasmic reticulum where it binds to the inositol trisphosphate receptor, rapidly releasing large stores of Ca2+, which also functions as a second messenger. DAG activates protein kinase C (PKC), though some isoforms also require Ca2+ to become activated. The released Ca2+ mediates many of its functions by binding to calmodulin, which can then activate multiple cellular targets, including calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMK). PKC and CaMK can phosphorylate multiple cellular targets, including various transcription factors. 
DAG, which is hydrophobic, remains in the plasma membrane where it activates various isoforms of PKC, a serine/threonine protein kinase. In its inactive state, PKC is found in the cytoplasm, but when DAG is generated, PKC relocates to the plasma membrane, becomes activated, and phosphorylates multiple cellular substrates. The water-soluble IP3 second messenger is released from the plasma membrane and diffuses to the endoplasmic reticulum where it binds to the inositol trisphosphate receptor. This receptor is a ligand-gated ion channel that, when bound by IP3, rapidly releases the large stores of Ca2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum. This released Ca2+ also functions as a second messenger, 

========411========

regulating various cellular functions. In addition to DAG, some isoforms of PKC also require Ca2+ to become activated. 
The rapid rise in intracellular Ca2+, mediated by IP3-induced release of cellular stores, has both immediate and more delayed effects on neuronal functioning. Immediate effects are triggered by direct binding of Ca2+ itself to various effector proteins and include the release of synaptic vesicles and the opening of calcium-activated ion channels in the plasma membrane. Delayed effects of Ca2+ signaling are similar to those of cAMP, such as effects on cellular energy metabolism and gene expression. Many of these slower effects of calcium signaling are mediated by the association of calcium with calmodulin, a small, ubiquitous, calcium-binding protein. Calmodulin is activated when the intracellular concentration of Ca2+ is high enough for four ions to bind to the calmodulin protein. Activated calmodulin has multiple cellular targets, including activating various kinases, such as the calcium/calmodulin-dependent (CaM) kinases. It is important to note that calcium-based signaling pathways can also be activated by an influx of Ca2+ from the cell surface by various voltage- and ligand-gated ion channels, independent of G-protein signaling. 
Termination of the phosphatidylinositol pathway involves multiple steps. DAG is degraded by lipases into glycerol and fatty acids or recycled into membrane phospholipids. Ca2+ is rapidly cleared from the cytoplasm by Ca2+–ATPase pumps on the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum, the action of which is enhanced by Ca2+ itself through the interaction of activated calmodulin with the transport pump. IP3 is sequentially dephosphorylated by inositol phosphatases to inositol, which can then be reintegrated into membrane phospholipids. Interestingly, lithium is an inhibitor of these inositol phosphatases and leads to an accumulation of IP3 and other inositol phosphates within cells. This leads to a depletion of the free cellular inositol needed to replenish membrane PIP2 for further signaling, prompting the hypothesis that the rundown of the phosphatidylinositol cycle may underlie lithium’s therapeutic action, though this remains controversial. Indeed, lithium is also known to inhibit several adenylate cyclases and protein kinases. 
Other Second Messenger Systems 
In addition to cAMP, another cyclic nucleotide, cGMP, is a second messenger that is regulated by neurotransmitter receptor stimulation. However, there are significant differences between the two systems. Guanylate cyclases are primarily cytoplasmic enzymes that are not directly activated by G proteins but are activated by the gas nitric oxide. Nitric oxide is synthesized in cells by NOS, which is activated by calmodulin and is thus mediated by increases in intracellular Ca2+ levels (Fig. 1.9–6). This 

========412========

demonstration that a gas can act as a second messenger blurs the distinction between extracellular and intracellular messengers, as nitric oxide is capable of diffusing across cell membranes and at synapses may act as a retrograde signal to the presynaptic neuron. Synthesis of cGMP also leads to various downstream effects, many through its activation of protein kinase G. Like cAMP, cGMP is degraded by various PDEs. Indeed, drugs for erectile dysfunction, such as sildenafil (Viagra), act by selectively inhibiting a PDE isoform that is highly enriched in the vascular smooth muscle of the penis, highlighting the utility of developing drugs that target intracellular signaling pathways. 
FIGURE 1.9–6. The cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) signaling pathway. In contrast to the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) system, cGMP synthesis via guanylate cyclase is not regulated by G proteins. Instead, guanylate cyclase is activated by nitric oxide, which is synthesized by nitric oxide synthase (NOS) after it is activated by a calcium/calmodulin complex. Like cAMP, cGMP affects neuronal function by stimulating its cognate kinase, protein kinase G (PKG). 
Another intracellular signaling system that appears to play an important role in neuronal function involves metabolites of the fatty acid arachidonic acid. Various receptors activate an enzyme called phospholipase A2, possibly through an unidentified G protein or elevations in cytoplasmic calcium levels. Phospholipase A2 cleaves membrane phospholipids, typically PIP2, releasing free arachidonic acid, which is rapidly converted to a number of active metabolites (Fig. 1.9–7). For example, arachidonic acid may be cleaved by cyclooxygenase to yield, after 

========413========

multiple 
enzymatic 
steps, 
types 
of 
prostaglandins 
and 
several 
thromboxanes. Alternatively, arachidonic acid may be cleaved by lipoxygenases to yield the leukotrienes. These active metabolites then regulate many intracellular functions, including ion channels and protein kinases, and are important for modulating signaling through other pathways by regulating adenylate and guanylate cyclases. Additionally, as these compounds are lipophilic, they can diffuse out of the neuron and act as ligands for their own GPCRs on other neurons. Interestingly, cyclooxygenase inhibitors have been hypothesized to improve cognitive 
performance in schizophrenia, processes in the brain. 
possibly 
by reducing 
inflammatory 
Direct Regulation of Ion Channels by G Proteins 
As discussed, the primary function of G proteins is to initiate second messenger signaling cascades that go on to affect a multitude of cellular 
functions 
including 
modulating 
ion 
channel 
gating 
through 
phosphorylation by kinases such as PKA, PKC, and CaM kinases. In addition, second messengers such as cAMP and cGMP can regulate ion channels directly. However, it is now clear that the G proteins themselves are also able to directly bind to and regulate ion channels independent of second messenger cascades. In particular, this process is best established for receptors that couple to the Gi family of G proteins, such as muscarinic 
acetylcholinergic, 
α2-adrenergic, 
D2-dopaminergic, 
and 
5-HT1A- 
serotonergic receptors. As before, the activation of these Gi-coupled receptors causes the dissociation of the G-protein α- and βγ-subunits. While the α-subunit goes on to inhibit adenylate cyclase, the βγ-subunits bind directly to the cytoplasmic regions of two different ion channels, depending on the cell type. In some cells, βγ-subunits bind to and directly open specific K+ channels known as G-protein–regulated inwardly rectifying K+ (GIRK) channels. These channels are called inwardly rectifying because, if under no electrochemical gradient, they more readily pass current inward; however, under normal physiological circumstances, K+ flow through GIRKs is primarily outward. In other cells, βγ-subunits directly inhibit voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, limiting the opening of these channels in response to membrane polarization. In addition to Gi, there is some evidence suggesting that certain members of the Gs family can increase the opening of certain voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, though it remains unclear if this is mediated by α- or βγ-subunits. Furthermore, recent evidence suggests that GIRKs may interact directly with GPCRs likely to promote near-instantaneous opening of the ion channel following G-protein activation. Overall, cellular signaling has evolved such that each of the major components of the signaling pathway can act on effector 

========414========

targets themselves or recruit downstream components of the signaling cascade. 
FIGURE 1.9–7. Organization of the arachidonic acid signaling pathway. Various G- protein–coupled receptors activate an enzyme called phospholipase A2 (PLA2), possibly through an unidentified G protein (G??). PLA2 primarily cleaves the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2), releasing free arachidonic acid (AA), which is rapidly converted to a number of active metabolites. For example, arachidonic acid may be cleaved by cyclooxygenase (COX) to yield prostaglandins and thromboxanes and by lipoxygenases (LOXs) to yield leukotrienes. These AA metabolites can regulate many intracellular functions and can diffuse out of the neuron and act as ligands for their own G- protein–coupled receptors on other neurons. 
Regulation of GPCR Signaling 
Because GPCRs play such a key role in cellular signaling, it is not surprising that their activity is tightly regulated. Indeed, regulation occurs at almost every point along the signaling pathways. Above, the termination of second messenger signaling was discussed, such as with the degradation of cAMP and cGMP by PDEs. In this section, regulation of the G proteins and GPCRs will be briefly discussed. 
The termination of G-protein signaling is mediated by the intrinsic GTPase activity of the α-subunit, which hydrolyzes GTP to GDP and thus inactivates the G protein. A separate class of proteins, called regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS) proteins, can accelerate the GTPase activity of the α-subunits thereby shortening the duration of G-protein signaling. There are more than 20 subtypes of RGS proteins that are differentially expressed throughout the brain and are involved in the regulation of all G- protein α-subunits, except for the Gs family. Specific subtypes of RGS 

========415========

proteins have been shown to regulate important neuronal functions, including behavior. For example, mice with a targeted deletion of the gene encoding RGS2, which regulates Gq, show increased anxiety and decreased male aggression, highlighting the important role of RGS proteins in modulating behavior. Interestingly, expression levels of RGS9, which inhibits Gi-mediated dopamine signaling in the striatum, were found to be reduced in the postmortem brains of patients with schizophrenia, consistent with the hypothesis of excessive dopamine signaling resulting in psychosis. Overall, the diversity and heterogeneous distributions of the RGS proteins make them an attractive target for drug development, as drugs affecting individual isoforms may exert highly selective effects. 
In addition to initiating intracellular signal transduction cascades, agonist activation of GPCRs also triggers cellular and molecular mechanisms that lead to the attenuation (desensitization) of receptor signaling. Desensitization is an adaptive mechanism to attenuate receptor responsiveness to repetitive environmental stimuli. At the level of the whole organism, the mechanisms underlying receptor desensitization are likely responsible for the development of tolerance to psychopharmacological agents such as opiates as well as the delayed therapeutic response to antidepressants and antipsychotics. 
Receptor desensitization is typically mediated by feedback phosphorylation of the receptor by a class of kinases called G protein– coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) (Fig. 1.9–8). The GRKs phosphorylate the intracellular domains of receptors only when the receptors are bound by an agonist. Receptor phosphorylation by GRKs enables a protein called arrestin to bind to the receptor, preventing the G protein from recoupling, thus rendering the receptor inactive. Arrestin binding to a GPCR also causes the receptor to be internalized into endocytic vesicles. This process is mediated by an interaction of the arrestin molecule with proteins in clathrin-coated pits, membrane invaginations that are pinched off during endocytosis. After internalization, receptors may be recycled back to the cell surface or degraded. Interestingly, mice with a targeted deletion of a particular arrestin isoform do not develop tolerance to the analgesic effects of morphine, suggesting that tolerance may be mediated by GRK and arrestin interactions with the opioid receptor. However, these “arrestin knockout” mice still develop morphine dependence, providing an elegant dissociation between these features of chronic morphine administration. While the precise role of receptor endocytosis is not entirely clear, targeting receptors for degradation may be involved in the downregulation of brain receptor level following chronic drug administration. Indeed, accumulating evidence suggests a high degree of specificity and plasticity in the regulation of GPCRs by endocytic membrane trafficking that may provide for the development of novel pharmacologic agents. 

========416========

FIGURE 1.9–8. Regulation of G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) by desensitization and internalization. Desensitization is an adaptive mechanism that attenuates receptor responsiveness to repetitive stimuli. GPCR desensitization is typically mediated by feedback phosphorylation (P) by a specific G-protein–coupled-receptor kinase (GRK). Receptor phosphorylation by a GRK causes a protein called arrestin to bind to the receptor, effectively preventing G proteins (G) from recoupling to the receptor. Arrestin binding also causes the receptor to be internalized into endocytic vesicles, which may then recycle the receptors back to the cell surface or target them for degradation. 
Role of Phosphatases 
Because phosphorylation plays such a central role in intracellular signaling pathways, it is not surprising that protein phosphatases, which reverse the effect of protein kinases, also have a major impact on these signaling pathways. There are four major protein phosphatases that are differentially distributed in the brain that dephosphorylate targets of the second messenger kinases, named protein phosphatases 1, 2A, 2B, and 2C. For example, protein phosphatase 2B, also called calcineurin, is activated by the binding Ca2+/calmodulin. Thus, neurotransmitters coupled to Gq proteins as well as Ca2+ channels can activate calcineurin and influence the phosphorylation of various cellular proteins. Indeed, phosphatases can be targets for pharmacological agents, as demonstrated by tacrolimus, an immunosuppressant agent used to prevent organ transplant rejection, which is a selective inhibitor of calcineurin that interferes with T lymphocyte signaling. 
Another key mechanism for regulating protein phosphatases involves a separate class of proteins called protein phosphatase inhibitors. These 

========417========

proteins, such as phosphatase inhibitors 1 and 2, are highly potent inhibitors of protein phosphatase 1, a major neuronal phosphatase, and their inhibitory activity is greatly enhanced when they are phosphorylated by PKA and other second messenger kinases. Thus, neurotransmitters that signal through cAMP can influence the phosphorylation of target proteins, both by PKA activation and through PKA-induced indirect inhibition of protein phosphatase 1. 
Another protein phosphatase inhibitor, called dopamine- and cAMP- regulated phosphoprotein of 32 kDa (DARPP-32), is of particular interest because it is highly concentrated in regions of the brain that receive dopaminergic input. Similar to other kinase events, phosphorylation of DARPP-32 by PKA greatly enhances its ability to inhibit protein phosphatase 1. Interestingly, DARPP-32 is dephosphorylated by calcineurin resulting in an increase in protein phosphatase 1 activity. Because calcineurin is activated by increases in intracellular Ca2+ concentrations, DARPP-32 may be involved in the integration of current signals from different pathways. Indeed, DARPP-32 is a key mediator of dopaminergic signaling and appears to play an important role in the effects of drugs of abuse. A share of the 2000 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Paul Greengard for elucidating this role of DARPP-32. 
TYROSINE KINASE PATHWAYS 
While the vast majority of the protein phosphorylation that occurs in cells is on serine and threonine residues, the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues has an extremely important role in a distinct set of intracellular signaling pathways. In particular, tyrosine-phosphorylation–based signaling is mediated by receptors for neurotrophic factors such as NGF and BNDF. Functionally, neurotrophic factors modulate a wide variety of cellular events, such as cell growth and differentiation, metabolism, and cell survival, and thus have been classically studied for their role in neurodevelopment. However, these factors have been shown to be expressed throughout the entire life span, and exciting new research is delineating roles that neurotrophic factors play in regulating behavior and responses to stress. 
Protein tyrosine kinases represent a diverse superfamily of proteins. These include the receptor tyrosine kinases, which are transmembrane receptors with a tyrosine kinase built into the intracellular domains, and nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, which are soluble cytoplasmic enzymes that are often recruited to membrane receptors to become activated. Neurotrophins such as NGF and BDNF bind to the Trk family of receptor tyrosine kinases that will be the primary focus of this section. Neurotrophins bind to two individual Trk receptors, resulting in the dimerization of the two receptors activating the protein tyrosine kinases 

========418========

that reside in the cytoplasmic domain of each receptor (Fig. 1.9–9). The activated Trk receptors subsequently phosphorylate the opposite dimer on tyrosine residues, a process called autophosphorylation. These phosphorylation events produce new binding sites for various other intracellular signaling proteins. For example, an adaptor protein called growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) contains an Src homology 2 (SH2) domain that binds to specific phosphorylated tyrosine residues on Trk and leads off a complex signaling cascade. 
As with neurotransmitter receptors, G proteins play a major role in the signal transduction from activated receptor tyrosine kinases. In this case, however, the G proteins are members of the Ras, Rho, and Ral families, collectively referred to as small G proteins. Like the classic G proteins described previously, small G proteins are bound to GDP in their inactive state and become active when GTP is bound. However, unlike the classic G proteins, the small G proteins are not directly activated by the receptor but by distinct proteins called guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). For Trk, binding of Grb2 to the phosphorylated tyrosine residues recruits a GEF protein called SOS (for Son of Sevenless), which then activates the small G-protein Ras by exchanging GTP for GDP. Once recruited to the receptor complex, SOS can activate many molecules of Ras, thus amplifying the initial signal. In its active GTP-bound form, Ras is able to activate the multiple downstream effector pathways described below. Ras is inactivated by hydrolysis of GTP to GDP, which can be accelerated by a specific GTPase-activating protein (GAP) called RasGAP, which is analogous to the action of RGS proteins on classic G proteins. 
Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Cascades 
In contrast to the classic second messenger signaling pathway, the activation of small G proteins such as Ras by receptor tyrosine kinases does not lead to the production of small-molecule intermediates. Instead, the small G proteins stimulate a signaling pathway that is organized as a kinase cascade in which a series of three or more kinases sequentially phosphorylate another kinase. Several parallel kinase cascades can be activated by various receptors and are collectively referred to as MAPK pathways. MAPKs are serine/threonine kinases making up three main classes characterized in mammals: The extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), the c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), and isoforms of p38. The ERK pathway is the classical MAPK pathway that is preferentially activated by the neurotrophins and other growth factors while the JNK and p38 pathways are activated by various forms of cellular stress. 

========419========

FIGURE 1.9–9. General organization of neurotrophic factor signaling through receptor tyrosine kinases. Receptor tyrosine kinases are transmembrane receptors with a tyrosine kinase built into the intracellular domains. Neurotrophic factor binding induces the dimerization of two receptors and the activation and autophosphorylation of their intrinsic tyrosine kinase domains. These phosphorylated (P) tyrosines become the binding sites for adaptor proteins such as growth-factor-receptor–bound protein 2 (Grb2), which can then attract a protein called Son of Sevenless (SOS) that activates the small G-protein Ras by enhancing the exchange of GTP for GDP. In its active GTP-bound form, Ras activates multiple downstream effector pathways, including mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades. A MAPK such as extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) is activated by a MAPK kinase (MAP2K) such as the MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK), which is activated by a MAPK kinase kinase (MAP3K) such as Raf. After the cascade, ERK can activate various cellular targets including ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK), which translocates to the nucleus and activates various transcription factors (TFs) and regulates gene expression. 
The kinase cascades that lead to MAPK activation follow an organization that is evolutionally well conserved from yeast to mammals: A MAPK kinase kinase kinase (MAP4 K) phosphorylates a MAPK kinase kinase (MAP3 K) that phosphorylates a MAPK kinase (MAP2 K) that then 

========420========

phosphorylates the MAPK (Fig. 1.9–9). The cascade of events leading to the activation of ERKs by neurotrophins through the Trk receptor begins with the activation of the small G-protein Ras. When Ras is active, it recruits a MAP3 K called Raf to the cell surface where it is phosphorylated by a MAP4K that is not yet well described. Raf then phosphorylates and activates a MAP2K called MEK (for MAP kinase/ERK kinase) that then phosphorylates and activates ERK. 
The ERK pathway is the subject of a considerable amount of current biomedical research, as it is involved in regulating a wide variety of cytoplasmic proteins as well as multiple transcription factors. For example, ERK phosphorylates and activates protein kinases such as ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK), which in turn phosphorylates an array of transcription factors including c-myc and CREB. Interestingly, stimulation of the ERK signaling pathway has also been linked to neurotransmitter receptors through PKC. Thus, ERK activation plays a key role in modulating long- term neuronal function and may represent a critical node for the interplay between other signaling pathways. 
Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase Pathway 
The elucidation of the signaling pathways downstream of Ras has identified another major kinase cascade that mediates many of the powerful effects of neurotrophins on neuronal differentiation and survival. This cascade involves the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway (Fig. 1.9–10). In this pathway, PIP2, the same membrane phospholipid that is cleaved to DAG and IP3 by PLC, is phosphorylated by PI3K, a lipid kinase, to yield PIP3, which then acts to recruit various proteins to the membrane. One of the proteins that PIP3 recruits to the membrane is Akt, a serine/threonine kinase that, upon translocation, becomes activated, dissociates from the membrane, and phosphorylates several substrate proteins important for controlling cell survival. For example, Akt activates the “rapid-acting” transcription factor nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), resulting in the transcription of prosurvival genes. NF-κB is present in cells in an inactive state bound to a protein called inhibitor of κB (IκB). Akt activates a kinase called IκB kinase that phosphorylates IκB, thus tagging it for degradation. This degradation releases NF-κB, which can then migrate to the nucleus and regulate gene expression. Akt may also inhibit glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3), a metabolic regulatory protein that may be a cellular target for lithium (see below). Indeed, a major challenge of current research involves determining which of the many effects of neurotrophins are mediated by these various signaling cascades. Interestingly, some Gi- coupled neurotransmitter receptors can also trigger the activation of PI3K and Akt, suggesting that agonists of these receptors may represent novel strategies for enhancing neuronal survival. 

========421========

FIGURE 1.9–10. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway. In addition to the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), receptor tyrosine kinase activation of Ras can activate the PI3K pathway. PI3K adds another phosphate to the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2) to yield phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate (PIP3). PIP3 recruits various proteins to the membrane including 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1) and a kinase called Akt. PDK1 phosphorylates Akt, which then dissociates from the membrane and can phosphorylate multiple cellular proteins important for controlling cell survival. For example, Akt can lead to the activation of a transcription factor called nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), which is normally found in an inactive state bound to “inhibitor of κB” (IκB). Akt activates a kinase called IκB kinase, which phosphorylates IκB, tagging it for degradation, which releases NF-κB that can then translocate to the nucleus and regulate gene expression. 
Mammalian Target of Rapamycin 
A downstream target of the PI3K, and a central node of integration of multiple extracellular signals is an atypical kinase called mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). mTOR is a central controller of local protein synthesis that is required for the formation of new synaptic connections. mTOR function is influenced by the activity of each of the major classes of receptors including ligand-gated ion channels, GPCRs, and neurotrophin receptors suggesting that mTOR may act as a signaling “node” at the convergence of several signaling pathways. Indeed, mTOR activity is regulated by multiple signaling pathways, notably the PI3K-Akt pathways, though the details are not fully characterized. 

========422========

Protein synthesis is a highly regulated process that can be separated into three general phases: initiation, elongation, and termination. mTOR is a master controller of protein synthesis by regulating both the initiation and elongation steps of protein synthesis (Fig. 1.9–11). One of the first mTOR targets to be discovered was 4E-BP (eukaryotic initiation factor 4E- binding protein) that, when phosphorylated by mTOR, releases eIF4E (eukaryotic initiation factor 4E) which can then initiate local protein translation by binding to the 7-methyl-guanosine cap of mRNAs. In addition, mTOR activates the ribosomal S6 kinases S6 K which then activates eEF2 K (eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase) facilitates protein synthesis. 
FIGURE 1.9–11. Regulation of protein translation by the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). Research on mTOR regulation has suggested that mTOR is a key point of convergence of multiple signaling pathways, notably via Akt. mTOR is a central controller of local protein synthesis by regulating proteins involved in protein translation initiation and elongation at ribosomes. The activated mTOR complex phosphorylates 4E-BP (eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding protein) which dissociates it with eIF4E (eukaryotic initiation factor 4E). eIF4E can then facilitate translation initiation by binding mRNA at the 7-methyl- guanosine cap (5’-m7Gppp). mTOR also facilitates the elongation of nascent polypeptides by phosphorylating ribosomal S6 kinase (S6K) which can then activate the eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase (eEF2K). 

========423========

Recently, there has been accumulating evidence linking mTOR signaling to long-lasting synaptic plasticity and various neuropsychiatric disorders. For example, the rapid antidepressant activity of NMDA receptor antagonists such as ketamine, may be mediated by the activation of the mTOR leading to increased translation of synaptic proteins and generation of new spine, particularly in the prefrontal cortex. In addition, genetic mutations that lead to pathologically sustained mTOR activity may underlie several neuropsychiatric disorders, including Fragile X syndrome, autism and tuberous sclerosis. 
WNT SIGNALING 
Another signaling pathway gaining interest in psychiatry and neurobiology is the Wnt signaling pathway. Wnts are a family of secreted glycoproteins known to play a critical role in embryogenesis. However, components of the Wnt signaling pathway are expressed in the adult brain, and Wnt signaling is important in adult behavior and possibly the pathophysiology of psychiatric and neurological disorders. The primary, or canonical, Wnt signaling pathway begins with binding of secreted Wnt proteins to cell- surface receptors of the Frizzled family. Frizzled receptors are seven- transmembrane-domain receptors similar to the GPCRs, though it remains unclear whether Frizzled interacts with a heterotrimeric G protein. It is clear, however, that Frizzled receptors activate a cytoplasmic protein called Dishevelled that ultimately leads to the regulation of gene expression through an increase in a transcriptional coactivator called β-catenin. 
In the absence of Wnt signaling, a complex of proteins that includes axin, GSK-3, and the protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) regulates the intracellular levels of β-catenin (Fig. 1.9–12). Through phosphorylation by GSK-3, this protein complex promotes the proteolytic degradation of β- catenin. However, when Wnt signaling is initiated, the activation of Dishevelled causes this protein complex to dissociate and other proteins to associate and inhibit GSK-3 activity, preventing the degradation of β- catenin. Thus, the cytoplasmic levels of β-catenin increase, and β-catenin translocates to the nucleus, interacting with transcription factors and promoting specific gene expression changes. In addition to the canonical signaling pathway, Wnt signaling has also been shown to follow other pathways, including increasing intracellular calcium and activating the MAPK JNK. Thus, while the details of the Wnt signaling pathway are not fully delineated, there is likely some intersection and cross-regulation with other signaling pathways, and this is an area of active research. 
Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 
Though initially discovered as a kinase involved in the regulation of glucose metabolism, GSK-3 is emerging as a promising target for the development 

========424========

of psychiatric and neurological medications. In 1996, it was discovered that lithium inhibited GSK-3, raising the possibility that GSK-3 inhibition might play a role in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Recently, there has been an emergence of research supporting the hypothesis that the inhibition of GSK-3 represents a therapeutically relevant target for mood stabilization. 
GSK-3 is a ubiquitous kinase, found in both neurons and glia, and has two isoforms that are highly homologous but may have slightly different biological effects. It is generally considered to be constitutively active, meaning that it phosphorylates target proteins until a signal regulates it to stop. For example, as described above, constitutive phosphorylation of β- catenin by GSK-3 leads to its proteolytic degradation, but signaling through the Wnt pathway turns off GSK-3, releasing β-catenin to affect gene expression. GSK-3 was initially characterized in 1980 as an enzyme that phosphorylated and deactivated glycogen synthase, leading to studies of its role in insulin signaling and diabetes mellitus. Indeed, insulin binding to the insulin receptor, a receptor tyrosine kinase, leads to the activation of Akt, which also phosphorylates and deactivates GSK-3. Because GSK-3 normally phosphorylates and inactivates glycogen synthase, insulin’s ability to turn off GSK-3 allows cells to utilize the elevated plasma glucose levels to make glycogen. 

========425========

FIGURE 1.9–12. Basic organization of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. The primary, or canonical, Wnt signaling pathway begins with the binding of secreted Wnt proteins to cell-surface receptors of the Frizzled family. In the absence of Wnt signaling, a complex of proteins that includes axin, adenomatosis polyposis coli (APC) protein, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) maintains an active form of GSK-3 (on), which phosphorylates multiple cellular proteins, including the transcriptional coactivator β- catenin. When β-catenin is phosphorylated, it is targeted for degradation. When Wnt signaling is initiated, Frizzled activates a protein called Dishevelled (Dshvl), which causes the dissociation of the axin/APC/GSK-3 complex, resulting in an inhibition of GSK-3 activity. Decreased GSK-3 activity reduces the degradation of β-catenin, which then translocates to the nucleus, interacts with transcription factors (TFs), and promotes specific gene expression changes. 

========426========

As discussed above, Akt is also activated by neurotrophic factors such as BDNF, low levels of which are implicated in depression and other neuropsychiatric disorders. Other kinases that regulate GSK-3 include PKA, PKC, and RSK, demonstrating that the mechanisms of regulation and biological targets of GSK-3 are quite diverse. This convergence of diverse signaling pathways onto GSK-3 is a characteristic that has led to the labeling of GSK-3 as a crucial signaling “node.” The precise mechanisms that regulate the cross-talk among these distinct pathways are not well established, and this is an area of active research. However, it is likely that the compartmentalization of GSK-3 to distinct regions of the cell minimizes much of the potential cross-talk among pathways. Interestingly, there is growing evidence that GSK-3 is involved in synaptic plasticity (see below), possibly by “funneling” diverse inputs into the processes that regulate synaptic strength. 
SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY 
Changes in the strength and efficiency of synaptic signaling, termed synaptic plasticity, underlie one of the most important neurochemical foundations of learning and memory. Because these processes play a prominent role in a variety of psychiatric disorders and psychotherapies, there has been intense interest in defining the cellular and molecular events mediating these processes. Because synaptic plasticity is activity- dependent, various intraneuronal signaling pathways are important for coordinating these changes. Indeed, there are several mechanisms that cooperatively affect synaptic plasticity, including changes in the release of presynaptic neurotransmitters and changes in how effectively the postsynaptic neuron responds to those neurotransmitters. A postsynaptic mechanism that is widely considered to be a major mediator for enhancing synaptic efficacy is called LTP. 
LTP is roughly defined as an increase in the strength of a synapse that lasts from hours to several days and is widely considered one of the major mechanisms by which memories are formed and stored in the brain. Given the diversity of neuronal cell types in the brain, there are many variations in the processes involved in LTP; however, the prototypical model is the CA1 region of the hippocampus, which has glutamatergic synapses. At these synapses, there are both early and late stages of LTP that are initiated by the actions of two glutamate-gated ion channels, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5- methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA) and NMDA receptors. Early LTP is mediated by modulating proteins already at the synapse while late LTP requires new protein synthesis. 
The initiation of early LTP begins with glutamate binding to AMPA receptors, which allows Na+ to enter the synapse, depolarizing the membrane (see Section 1.10 for details) (Fig. 1.9–13). When the postsynaptic membrane is sufficiently depolarized, NMDA receptors open, 

========427========

leading to a rapid increase in intracellular Ca2+ concentrations. The rise in Ca2+ levels leads to the activation of CaM kinase II and PKC, which rapidly phosphorylate the AMPA receptors, increasing the efficiency of synaptic transmission, and regulate the insertion of additional AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic membrane. By increasing the number of AMPA receptors at the synapse, future signaling stimuli are able to generate larger postsynaptic responses. This process may additionally be regulated by the concomitant activation of other signaling pathways through various GPCRs. 
Although these phosphorylation events underlie the rapid changes in synaptic efficacy during early LTP, enduring changes characteristic of “late LTP” depend on the targeting of newly synthesized proteins to the synapses. These newly targeted proteins, which can include additional receptors and scaffolding proteins, induce a remodeling of the synapse and can profoundly strengthen postsynaptic responses to stimuli. At least some of this new protein synthesis appears to occur locally in the dendrites allowing direct targeting of the new proteins to the activated synapse, a process largely regulated by mTOR activity. 
Overall, LTP and the other cellular mechanisms involved in synaptic plasticity, including a process called LTD, are highly active areas of neuroscience research. The current understanding of these processes highlights the complexity and importance of tight temporal and spatial regulation of synaptic signaling. Continued elucidation of these biochemical mechanisms underlying synaptic plasticity will enhance the understanding of learning and behavior, provide insights into psychiatric diseases, and may allow the development of pharmacological agents that can improve cognition. 

========428========

FIGURE 1.9–13. An example schematic of a postsynaptic mechanism involved in long- term potentiation (LTP) and synaptic plasticity. Initiation of LTP begins with glutamate binding to α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA) receptors gating the influx of Na+ ions into the synapse, depolarizing the membrane. When the postsynaptic membrane is sufficiently depolarized, N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors open, leading to a rapid increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels, which, through binding to calmodulin, activate Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinases (CaMKs) and protein kinase C (PKC). These activated protein kinases can then both phosphorylate AMPA receptors and regulate the insertion of additional AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic membrane intracellular pool. Together, these processes increase the efficiency of future synaptic transmission. 
SIGNALING COMPLEXES AND SCAFFOLDS 
Several additional types of proteins are central to the organization of signaling pathways. These include scaffolding and anchoring proteins, which provide mechanisms to ensure that information being signaled in cells is transferred to the appropriate targets in a timely and efficient manner. They do this by mediating the localized assembly of multiprotein complexes that contain, for example, receptors, second-messenger– generating enzymes, kinases, phosphatases, and substrates. By keeping many of the components of a signaling cascade in close proximity, these complexes minimize the need for activated proteins to diffuse through a dense cytoplasm to find their targets, thus greatly enhancing signaling efficiency. Additionally, these systems both maintain the separation, or compartmentalization, of distinct signals when simultaneous signaling 

========429========

events are occurring and are crucially involved in moderating and integrating this information. The characterization of the multitude of ways that signaling pathways interact via these complexes is an active area of research. 
Many of these scaffolding and adaptor proteins use specific protein– protein interactions to mediate the transport and localization of signaling proteins and form these specialized multiprotein complexes. Protein interactions are often formed by distinct domains within adaptor proteins that are responsible for recognizing and binding to specific regions of other proteins. An example mentioned above is the Src homology (SH) domain involved heavily in neurotrophin signaling. SH2 domains, found in adaptor proteins such as Grb2, are roughly 100 amino acids long and specifically bind to short amino acid sequences that contain a phosphorylated tyrosine residue. Multiple proteins can bind to these phosphotyrosine sequences via their SH2 domains, some of which are subsequently phosphorylated and activated, and others act as adaptors that recruit other substrates to the kinase. Indeed, activated receptor tyrosine kinases, such as Trk, serve as scaffolds for an array of activated signaling molecules. Another important example is the localization of PKA to distinct sites within cells by a family of scaffolding proteins called A-kinase-anchoring proteins (AKAPs). These AKAPs bind to the regulatory subunits of PKA, holding it near particular substrates while it is awaiting activation by cAMP. Some AKAPs, for example, are thought to localize PKA next to synaptic ion channels, greatly enhancing the rate of substrate phosphorylation by eliminating delays due to protein diffusion. 
Scaffolding also organizes signaling complexes involving the classic neurotransmitter receptors and ion channels at synapses. A common protein domain involved in protein scaffolding in these systems is the PDZ domain. PDZ domains are found in more than 400 proteins in humans and bind tightly to the extreme C-terminal segment of proteins in which the last three amino acids are S/TXV (i.e., serine [S] or threonine [T], followed by any amino acid [X], followed by valine [V] or another hydrophobic amino acid). Given the large number of proteins containing PDZ domains and PDZ recognition elements, scaffolds containing these proteins can assemble into very large molecular complexes. The best-known example of these large scaffolds is the PSD of excitatory neurons, which organizes glutamate receptors and their associated signaling proteins at the postsynaptic membrane and helps to determine the size and strength of synapses. Indeed, scores of proteins have been identified in the PSD: Ion- gated and GPCRs, kinases, and phosphatases and cytoskeletal proteins, all targeted and maintained in the PSD by various adaptor and scaffolding proteins. Thus, scaffolding proteins are major players in the organization of the postsynaptic signaling machinery. 

========430========

Functional Selectivity 
Even though most cell-surface receptors have classically been described as activating a single primary intracellular signaling cascade, as discussed above, most receptors also activate one or more additional pathways. Some GPCRs, for example, have been shown to signal through the phosphatidylinositol pathway, the arachidonic acid pathway, and the MAPK/ERK pathway, among others. In addition, activation of these receptors stimulates the biochemical mechanisms involved in their desensitization and internalization. A classical concept of receptor pharmacology is that a receptor ligand can be either classified as a full agonist, partial agonist, or antagonist at that receptor and that this classification will be consistent for all of the signaling pathways for that receptor. In other words, if a receptor ligand fully activates the phosphatidylinositol pathway, then it is expected to fully activate all of the other signaling and regulatory pathways linked to that receptor. However, there is now evidence that some ligands may inherently be able to produce different levels of signaling among the various pathways (Fig. 1.9–14). This phenomenon is most often referred to as “functional selectivity” (also called biased agonism). 
An example of functional selectivity is seen with 5-HT2C serotonin receptors, which activate the phosphatidylinositol signaling pathway as well as arachidonic acid release. Pharmacological studies looking at a panel of different 5-HT2C receptor agonists showed that full agonism for increasing IP3 and Ca2+ was not correlated with the efficacy of the ligand to increase arachidonic acid. In addition, it was demonstrated that the ability of agonists to activate 5-HT2C receptor signaling pathways did not predict their ability to desensitize the receptor to that pathway. For example, the 5- HT2C receptor ligand meta-chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP) is a partial agonist for IP3 signaling with 80 to 90 percent of the efficacy of the endogenous full agonist 5-HT and causes a similar level of receptor desensitization. However, mCPP is a full agonist for the arachidonic acid pathway, but induces little or no 5-HT2C receptor desensitization. At the extreme end, functionally selective ligands may act both as agonists and antagonists at different receptor-mediated functions. As an interesting example, 5-HT2A serotonin receptor antagonists, while unable to induce the stimulation of any classical signaling pathways, have been shown to induce receptor internalization and downregulation. Similar antagonist- induced internalization has also been demonstrated with CCK and other peptide receptors. 

========431========

FIGURE 1.9–14.Functionalselectivity.InadditiontothecanonicalG-protein–mediated signaling pathways, most GPCRs can activate other signaling pathways. While classical receptor pharmacology theory posits that a full agonist at a receptor will activate all signaling pathways equally, it is now clear that some ligands may inherently be able to produce different levels of signaling from the various pathways. This phenomenon is referred to as “functional selectivity.” 
While the examples above focus on serotonin receptors, functional selectivity has been demonstrated in many GPCRs and may be mediated by a variety of mechanisms. First, different ligands may sample and stabilize unique conformational changes in the receptor protein, resulting in a differential activation of the various signaling pathways. Second, functional selectivity may be affected by the diversity of G proteins and other signaling and scaffolding proteins or may be related to the observed ability of GPCRs to dimerize and oligomerize, the function of which remains poorly understood. Thus, not only is the concept of functional selectivity an interesting one, but it is likely to have an important impact on future psychiatric drug development. 
REMOTE CONTROL OF INTRANEURONAL SIGNALING 
In recent years, emerging synthetic biology technologies have allowed for the targeted activation of intracellular signaling pathways with spatial and temporal precision. These techniques have facilitated the study of complex circuits and behaviors and are revolutionizing the understanding of brain function. In one approach, chimeric receptors were engineered that replaced the intracellular loops of the light-activated rhodopsin with those of specific adrenergic or serotonergic receptors. These artificial receptors, collectively called “opto-XRs,” allow the use of light to activate the signaling pathways normally recruited by the receptor used for the intracellular loops. Because of the speed of optical manipulation, this approach allows for rapid stimulation of intracellular signaling and examination of the effects of tonic versus phasic activation, though it requires the invasive insertion of optical fibers into the brain. Another approach uses specifically engineered GPCRs that are only activated by synthetic ligands that do not 

========432========

activate endogenous receptors. Termed DREADDs (designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs) or RASSLs (receptors activated solely by synthetic ligands), these technologies similarly allow for precise spatiotemporal control of intracellular signaling in vivo. Various versions of DREADDs and RASSLs activate the major GPCR signaling pathways (Gs, Gi, and Gq). In addition, since they are activated by drugs, DREADDs and RASSLs allow the noninvasive modulation of intracellular signaling and thus have potential to be used for transformative therapeutic approaches for a host of neuropsychiatric disorders. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Translating the advances in molecular neurobiology into improved diagnostic and therapeutic capabilities represents the greatest opportunity and challenge facing modern psychiatry. The current armamentarium of medications used in treating psychiatric diseases has facilitated decades of progress in understanding intercellular signaling mediated by cell-surface receptors. However, dramatic and ongoing advances in the understanding of the intraneuronal signaling pathways activated by these receptors will likely lead to novel, innovative, and improved pharmacological agents for psychiatric diseases, as has been achieved in other branches of medicine. Thus, future efforts in drug discovery should move beyond the current strategies of solely targeting synaptic neurotransmission at the receptor level to the development of agents acting on components of intracellular signaling pathways. By nature, signaling pathways have significant redundancy and interactions. Thus, identifying and targeting critical points within these networks may lead to improved molecular diagnostic tests and treatments. 
REFERENCES 
Airan RD, Thompson KR, Fenno LE, Bernstein H, Deisseroth K. Temporally precise in vivo control of intracellular signalling. Nature. 2009;458:1025–1029. 
*Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K. Molecular Biology of the Cell. New York: Garland; 2002. 
Angelucci F, Brene S, Mathe AA. BDNF in schizophrenia, depression and corresponding animal models. Mol Psychiatry. 2005;10:345–352. 
*Blitzer RD, Iyengar R, Landau EM. Postsynaptic signaling networks: Cellular cogwheels underlying long-term plasticity. Biol Psychiatry. 2005;57:113–119. 
Boeckers TM. The postsynaptic density. Cell Tissue Res. 2006;326:409–422. 
Bohn LM, Gainetdinov RR, Lin FT, Lefkowitz RJ, Caron MG. Mu-opioid receptor desensitization by β-arrestin-2 determines morphine tolerance but not dependence. Nature. 2000;408:720– 723. 
Cheyette BN, Moon RT. Wnt protein family. In: Henry HL, Norman AW, eds. Encyclopedia of Hormones. San Diego: Academic Press; 2003. 

========433========

Doupnik CA. GPCR-Kir channel signaling complexes: defining rules of engagement. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2008;28:83–91. 
Duman RS, Voleti B. Signaling pathways underlying the pathophysiology and treatment of depression: novel mechanisms for rapid-acting agents. Trends in Neurosci. 2012;35:47–56. Gainetdinov RR, Premont RT, Bohn LM, Lefkowitz RJ, Caron MG. Desensitization of G protein- coupled receptors and neuronal functions. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2004;27:107–144. 
Hanyaloglu AC, von Zastrow M. Regulation of GPCRs by endocytic membrane trafficking and its potential implications. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2008;48:537–568. 
Kobayashi T, Ikeda K. G protein-activated inwardly rectifying potassium channels as potential therapeutic targets. Curr Pharm Des. 2006;12:4513–4523. 
Kroeze WK, Sheffler DJ, Roth BL. G-protein-coupled receptors at a glance. J Cell Sci. 2003;116:4867–4869. 
Lee HK, Takamiya K, Han JS, et al. Phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor GluR1 subunit is required for synaptic plasticity and retention of spatial memory. Cell. 2003;112:631–643. Le Novère N, Li L, Girault JA. DARPP-32: molecular integration of phosphorylation potential. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2008;65:2125–2127. 
Malinow R, Malenka RC. AMPA receptor trafficking and synaptic plasticity. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2002;25:103–126. 
Maxwell CR, Kanes SJ, Abel T, Siegel SJ. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors: A novel mechanism for receptor-independent antipsychotic medications. Neuroscience. 2004;29:101–107. 
Michel JJ, Scott JD. AKAP mediated signal transduction. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2002;42:235–257. 
Miyakawa T, Leiter LM, Gerber DJ, Gainetdinov RR, Sotnikova TD, Zeng H. Conditional calcineurin knockout mice exhibit multiple abnormal behaviors related to schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;100:8987–8992. 
Müller N, Schwarz MJ. COX-2 inhibition in schizophrenia and major depression. Curr Pharm Des. 2008;14:1452–1465. 
*Nestler EJ, Hyman SE, Malenka RC. Molecular Neuropharmacology. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2001. 
Pastalkova E, Serrano P, Pinkhasova D, Wallace E, Fenton AA, Sacktor TC. Storage of spatial information by the maintenance mechanism of LTP. Science. 2006;313:1141–1144. 
*Patapoutian A, Reichardt LF. Trk receptors: Mediators of neurotrophin action. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2001;11:272–280. 
Peineau S, Bradley C, Taghibiglou C, et al. The role of GSK-3 in synaptic plasticity. Br J Pharmacol. 2008;153(Suppl 1):S428–S437. 
*Rogan SC, Roth BL. Remote control of neuronal signaling. Pharmacol Rev. 2011;63:291–315. *Urban JD, Clarke WP, von Zastrow M, et al. Functional selectivity and classical concepts of quantitative pharmacology. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007;320:1–13. 
Willars GB. Mammalian RGS proteins: Multifunctional regulators of cellular signalling. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2006;17:363–376. 
Yaffe M, Cantley L. Grabbing phosphoproteins (what happens to proteins after phosphorylation). Nature. 1999;402:30–31. 

========434========

▲ 1.10 Cellular and Synaptic Basis of Neural Signaling 
CHARLES F. ZORUMSKI, M.D., AND STEVEN MENNERICK, PH.D. 
INTRODUCTION 
Neuropsychiatric disorders involve defects in intercellular communication. Although these defects often include changes in synaptic interactions between neurons, changes in the excitability of neurons also contribute to pathogenesis. Furthermore, pharmacological and brain stimulation treatments aimed at altering neuronal excitability are becoming standard for neurological and psychiatric disorders. The clearest example is epilepsy where abnormal neuronal excitability is a hallmark of the disorder. Altered excitability also contributes to primary psychiatric disorders, and many anticonvulsants used to treat mood disorders affect neuronal excitability and secondarily influence synaptic function. Similarly, brain stimulation techniques directly exploit electrical properties of neurons for therapeutic purposes. 
Although the brain is not an “electrical organ,” neurons use electrical signals to send and receive information. These electrical signals determine the brain’s local and network properties and result from the flow of ions across cell membranes through macromolecular pores called ion channels. Neurons express two major classes of ion channels, gated and nongated. Nongated (or leakage) channels are open at rest and contribute to the cellular resting membrane potential. The opening and closing of most ion channels is regulated (gated) by changes in transmembrane voltage, extracellular chemicals, or intracellular messengers. Certain voltage-gated sodium channels open and close rapidly and provide the basis for communication within and between neurons. These rapid signals (action potentials) are generated near the neuronal cell body and are transmitted with little decrement in amplitude along the neuron’s axon to nerve terminals. This high-fidelity signal propagation involves the regenerative nature of action potentials, imparted by the presence of voltage-gated channels along the length of the axon. In myelinated axons, action potential propagation is enhanced by saltatory conduction, which refers to the ability of electrical signals to “jump” between axonal nodes of Ranvier. 
At nerve terminals, the wave of action potential-induced depolarization opens voltage-gated calcium channels, and the influx of calcium promotes release of a chemical neurotransmitter into the extracellular space where the transmitter then influences a receptive cell. Neurotransmitters bind two broad classes of receptors and alter neuronal excitability via actions on ion channels. Ligand-gated ion 

========435========

channels are directly opened by transmitter binding whereas GPCRs influence ion channels indirectly via guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins) or intracellular chemical messengers. This chapter outlines the basic principles of cellular electrophysiology and discusses the importance of electrical signals to brain function and neuropsychiatry. 
PRINCIPLES OF CELLULAR ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY Resting Membrane Potential 
The concentration of potassium ion [K+] is much higher inside the cell than outside, reflecting the selective permeability of most cell membranes at rest to K+. The basis for this selective permeability is the presence of nongated (leakage) K+ channels in the cell membrane. Potassium channels are a class of transmembrane proteins with a hydrophilic pore region that selectively conducts K+. Positively charged K+ ions are initially attracted into the cell by large, impermeant intracellular anions (acids and proteins). As K+ accumulates in the cell, the membrane potential of the cell becomes more depolarized (less negative), and therefore, K+ entry is driven less and less by the electrical gradient. Intracellular concentrations of K+ achieve levels of ~100 mM while extracellular [K+] is between 2 and 6 mM, setting up a chemical gradient, which in isolation would result in net K+ efflux from the cell. Thus, two gradients act on K+, the intracellular electronegativity resulting in K+ influx, and the chemical gradient resulting in K+ efflux. At a specific membrane potential (around −90 mV), the electrical and chemical gradients for K+ are equal and opposite. This membrane potential is known as the equilibrium potential (also called the Nernst potential) for K+. The equilibrium potential is the transmembrane potential at which the electrical and chemical gradients are balanced and there is no net flux of a specific ion. In a cell whose membrane is exclusively permeable to K+, the resting potential of the cell would be equal to the equilibrium potential for K+. 
The situation in most neurons is not this simple because other ions, with different electrochemical gradients, are slightly permeant through ion channels that are open in the resting cell membrane. Each of these ions has its own characteristic equilibrium potential depending on the ion concentrations inside and outside the cell. The cations Na+ and Ca2+ are present at higher concentrations outside than inside the cell. Therefore, at negative membrane potentials, both the electrical and chemical gradients for these cations are inwardly directed, and the equilibrium potentials are positive to 0 mV. Chloride (Cl−) concentrations are usually higher outside the cell, but because of this ion’s negative charge, the equilibrium potential for chloride is near the resting potential (Fig. 1.10–1). The actual resting potential of a given cell is determined by the average of the equilibrium 

========436========

potentials of all the permeant ions, weighted by the relative permeability of each ion. At rest, K+ and Cl− are much more permeant than the other ions so the resting potential is closest to the equilibrium potentials for these ions. Na+ and Ca2+ are less permeant and thus contribute less to the resting potential, but the small permeability of nongated channels to these cations renders the actual resting potential more positive than the equilibrium potentials of K+ or Cl−. Typical values for neuronal resting potentials are between −55 and −70 mV. Astrocytes, by contrast, have a membrane more purely permeable to K+ and therefore a more deeply negative resting membrane potential (~−90 mV), very close to the K+ equilibrium potential. 
FIGURE 1.10–1. The figure shows the distribution of Na+, K+, Ca2+, and Cl− across the membrane of a neuron; the arrows show the direction of current flow down the chemical gradient. Using the indicated ion concentrations, the equilibrium (Nernst) potentials for these ions at 37°C are shown at the lower left. 
The concepts of equilibrium potential and membrane potential outlined above can be described quantitatively by the Nernst equation. The equilibrium potential for any ionic species can be calculated based on the ion concentrations on either side of the membrane. For K+, the equilibrium potential (designated EK) is expressed as: EK = (RT/zF) ë ln([K]o/[K]i), 

========437========

where R is the ideal gas constant (8.31 joules/degree/mole), T is the temperature in degrees Kelvin, z is the valence of the ion, F is Faraday’s constant (96,500 coulombs/mole, the charge on a mole of monovalent ions), and [K]o and [K]i are the concentrations of K+ outside and inside the cell. At 37oC, the equilibrium potential for K+ is −96 mV, ENa is +67 mV, ECl is −81 mV, and ECa is greater than +97 mV. These equilibrium potentials are important in determining what happens to the membrane potential when an ion channel that is permeable to a specific ion opens or closes because the opening of a specific ion channel drives the membrane potential toward the equilibrium potential for that ion. For example, when K+-selective ion channels open the neuronal membrane potential moves toward −96 mV. This makes the inside of the cell more negative, an effect called hyperpolarization. Na+ and Ca2+ channel opening has the opposite effect, making the inside of the cell less negative (depolarization). 
Because resting cell membranes are permeable to more than one ion, the true membrane potential is never exactly equal to the equilibrium potential for any one ion. The Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz (GHK) equation quantitatively describes the actual resting potential as the average of the various equilibrium potentials, weighted by the relative permeability of each ion. The equation is of the form: 
Most of the variables are familiar from the Nernst equation. Em is the membrane potential and Pion is the permeability of the membrane to the ion. The resting membrane potential is thus a reversal potential (potential at which no net inward or outward current flows) for the various conductances open at rest. 
The bulk solutions on either side of the membrane are electrically neutral, with most of the intracellular negative charge being contributed by large intracellular organic anions (acids and proteins). The differential distribution of ions across neuronal membranes is maintained by membrane pumps that use energy from ATP hydrolysis to move ions against a concentration gradient into or out of the cell. The best- characterized pump is the Na+-K+ ATPase (sodium pump) that transports 3 Na+ out of and 2 K+ into the cell during each cycle. Because an unequal amount of charge is moved during each cycle, the pump is electrogenic and contributes to intracellular negativity of the membrane potential. Na+-K+ ATPase activity is a major contributor to brain energy utilization, with as much as 40 percent of brain oxygen consumption 

========438========

resulting from the pump activity required to reestablish ionic homeostasis following action potential firing and synaptic transmission. The cardiac glycosides, digoxin and ouabain, inhibit Na+-K+ ATPase in the heart and improve myocardial contractility by depolarizing cardiac myocytes and increasing intracellular Ca2+. 
The resting potential is relatively static and represents the potential energy available for neuronal signaling. Negative resting potentials are not unique to excitable cells, but neurons and other excitable cells make unique use of the energy stored in the resting potential to generate transient membrane potential changes, the true currency of neuronal information exchange. A membrane potential change is typically initiated by a change in current flow across the membrane, usually resulting from the opening or closing of specific ion channels discussed below. The number of ions needed to change the membrane potential is very small relative to concentrations in the bulk intracellular and extracellular solutions. For example, a potential change of 100 mV across a 1 cm2 area of membrane requires the movement of only about 10−12 moles of a monovalent (singly charged) ion. By comparison, Na+ and K+ are present at about 10−1 M in the extracellular and intracellular fluids, respectively. 
Passive Membrane Properties 
To understand how ion concentration gradients, electrical gradients, ion channels, and the distribution of charges across the membrane are related, it is helpful to think of the cell membrane as an electrical circuit consisting of resistors (conductors), batteries, and capacitors. Because ions flow through ion channels and do not directly penetrate the cell membrane, ion channels can be viewed as variable resistors. Physiologists describe ion channels in terms of their selectivity (which ions flow through the channel) and their conductance (relative ease of passing ions). Conductance (g) is the inverse of resistance (R) in an electrical circuit (g = 1/R). The presence of a voltage across the membrane provides an electrical driving force for the flow of ions through ion channels resulting in a transmembrane current. The relationship among voltage (V), ionic current (I), and resistance (conductance) is given by the physiologist’s version of Ohm’s law: Iionic = g(Vm−Erev), where Vm is the membrane potential, Erev is the equilibrium (Nernst) potential for the ion(s) flowing through the channel, and (Vm − Erev) is the driving force for ion flow. 
Capacitance is another important passive membrane electrical property. A capacitor consists of two conductors separated by an insulating material that is capable of storing charges of opposite sign on the two conductors. In the case of neurons, the conductors are the extracellular and intracellular fluids while the lipid membrane is the insulator. Whenever current flows through the membrane, some current must be used to charge 

========439========

the membrane capacitance (Cm). The expression describing this capacitive current is: Icap = Cm(dV/dt). Note that capacitive current flows only when the membrane potential is changing (i.e., there is some change in voltage [dV] over time [dt]). The total current flowing across a membrane at any given time is a sum of Icap and Iionic. The membrane capacitance along with the leak conductance of the membrane at rest helps to set the low pass filtering property of a neuron. A major tool used by physiologists to study ionic currents is a voltage clamp, often implemented using the patch clamp method. These techniques employ specialized amplifiers to keep the membrane potential constant and eliminate capacitive currents during physiological studies by preventing changes in voltage, making it possible to measure ionic currents directly. 
One way to view the operation of an ion channel is as a battery (voltage source) in series with a conductor (resistor). The different types of ion channels are in parallel with each other and with the membrane capacitance. Thus, the neuronal membrane can be represented by an equivalent electrical circuit (Fig. 1.10–2), which describes membrane current flow in response to stimulation. 
Active Membrane Properties: Action Potentials 
Changes in membrane potential have important effects on excitability because some ion channels are regulated (gated) by voltage changes. When neurons depolarize, specific Na+ channels open rapidly and drive the membrane potential toward the Na+ equilibrium potential (~+66 mV). Because of leakage channels that are open at rest, there is initially a balance between leakage currents and the currents flowing through Na+ channels opened by depolarization. At a specific depolarized membrane potential, the current flowing through Na+ channels exceeds the current through the leak channels. The membrane potential at which Na+ currents exceed leakage currents is called the threshold potential. This potential is typically between −45 mV and −30 mV in neurons. At membrane potentials depolarized to threshold, the entry of more Na+ into the neuron produces further depolarization, which in turn opens more Na+ channels in a positive-feedback cycle. During this process, the neuronal membrane potential becomes more positive than 0 mV but never reaches the Na+ equilibrium potential for three reasons. First, the leak channels continue to play a role in determining the membrane potential during the action potential. Because of the relative K+ selectivity of these channels, the membrane potential never reaches the Na+ equilibrium potential. Second, during depolarization, Na+ channels not only activate but also rapidly inactivate. Inactivation is a process by which voltage-gated channels enter a nonconducting state despite the continued presence of the 

========440========

activating stimulus (in this case, depolarization). Third, the depolarization produced by Na+ entry also opens voltage-gated K+ channels that drive the membrane potential toward the K+ equilibrium potential (~−90 mV). The net effect of activation and inactivation of Na+ channels and the delayed opening of voltage-gated K+ channels is that the neuronal membrane potential rapidly changes to values more positive than 0 mV and then returns rapidly to the resting membrane potential. This rapid sequence occurs over several milliseconds and is referred to as an action potential (or sodium spike) (Fig. 1.10–3). The fact that the membrane potential transiently exceeds 0 mV is called an overshoot. To a first approximation, action potentials represent all-or-none increases in electrical excitability and are important contributors to information transfer within and between neurons. Because they propagate (see below), action potentials allow the neuronal cell body to communicate rapidly with its axon terminals. In axon terminals, the spike provides the depolarization that promotes Ca2+ channel opening and Ca2+-dependent release of neurotransmitters. 
FIGURE 1.10–2. A: Ion channels are protein pores that span the lipid bilayer of cell membranes (upper panel). Because of membrane pumps, the extracellular surface of the membrane has a net positive charge with respect to the intracellular surface. The figure shows a membrane schematic that includes major leak and/or voltage-activated ion channels and the predominant direction of ion flux under physiological conditions. B: As a result of the transmembrane potential and the presence of ion channels, the neuronal membrane can be described as an equivalent electrical circuit in which each ion channel is a variable resistor (conductor, Gx) in series with a battery (Ex) (lower panel). Different ion channels are in parallel with each other and in parallel with the membrane capacitance (Cm). 
In most neurons, the K+ equilibrium potential is negative with respect to the resting membrane potential. Thus, the action potential is often followed by a transient undershoot (or afterhyperpolarization [AHP]) 

========441========

that decays back to the resting potential as the voltage-sensitive K+ channels responsible for action potential repolarization close (Fig. 1.10–3). Following an action potential, there is a time during which depolarization either cannot elicit an action potential or during which it takes a very strong depolarization to evoke an action potential. These are called the absolute and relative refractory periods. The absolute refractory period results from nearly complete inactivation of Na+ channels immediately following an action potential. The relative refractory period reflects the time it takes for voltage-gated K+ channels to close following membrane repolarization. 
Action Potential Conduction in Axons 
Action potentials are usually generated in the initial segment of the axon (called the axon hillock) within about 50 μm of the neuronal cell body. Because action potentials are initiated at a distance from nerve terminals where neurotransmitters are released, an important question concerns how action potentials propagate to synaptic terminals. In a strictly passive nerve fiber, leakage of current across the membrane results in decremental conduction with the signal (voltage change) fading over a distance that is determined by the longitudinal (axial) resistance of the fiber, the membrane capacitance, and the transmembrane resistance. Passive decremental conduction is more typical of how voltage changes spread along dendrites back to the neuronal cell body, although dendrites also express voltage-gated ion channels that support back-propagating action potentials and that play important roles in modifying synaptically generated voltage changes in dendrites. 

========442========

FIGURE 1.10–3. A: The trace shows a neuronal action potential recorded by an intracellular microelectrode. The portions of the action potential are described in the text. B: The lower portion of the figure shows the sequence of events underlying an action potential. 
Many, but not all, axons are encased in myelin sheaths that allow them to transmit action potentials more efficiently. As a result of myelination, axons are electrically insulated except at nodes of Ranvier where there are dense collections of the voltage-gated Na+ channels involved in action potential initiation (Fig. 1.10–4). The myelin sheath greatly increases transmembrane resistance and decreases membrane capacitance. This diminishes leakage of current from the axon, making it easier for current to flow down the length of the axon, thus changing the membrane potential distally. Once generated, action potentials propagate rapidly, and the wave of depolarization jumps from node to node in a form that transmits the signal faithfully to nerve terminals. This process of action potential spread through myelinated axons is called saltatory conduction (from the Latin word saltare meaning “to jump”) and is important because of the speed and fidelity with which electrical information is passed from a neuronal cell 

========443========

body to its terminals. Note that while depolarization-gated currents initiate comparatively sluggishly because of the time-dependent changes in channel conformational state required, the passive current flow between nodes is essentially instantaneous. Thus, passive spread of current longitudinally down the axon is important in determining the conduction speed. A typical value for conduction velocity in large myelinated axons is ~100 m/s, while propagation in small unmyelinated fibers is ~0.3 m/s. The importance of saltatory conduction is readily appreciated when considering the distances over which impulses must travel from motor cortex to cause movement in the toes. In several human illnesses, including multiple sclerosis and Guillain–Barré syndrome, demyelination of axons produces changes in axon conduction and specific neurological defects. 
FIGURE 1.10–4. The diagram depicts saltatory conduction of an action potential in a neuron with a myelinated axon. The action potential is generated in the axon initial segment. As the waveform moves along the axon, current tends to leak from the cell diminishing the amplitude. However, myelin insulates the axon and markedly diminishes current leakage, thus enhancing flow to the first node of Ranvier. At the node of Ranvier, Na+ channels open in response to the wave of depolarization and reproduce the all-or-none action potential. The sequence is repeated at subsequent nodes of Ranvier until the action potential reaches the nerve terminal. 

========444========

FIGURE 1.10–5.Thediagramshowstheproposedsecondarystructureofvoltage-gated Na+ channels based on α-subunit amino acid sequences. Na+ channels consist of four homologous domains (I, II, III, and IV), each of which has six membrane-spanning regions (numbered 1 to 6). Both the amino (N) and carboxy (C) terminals are located intracellularly. A stretch of amino acids between S5 and S6, called the P-loop, forms two antiparallel β- sheets that line the ion channel pore. Positive charges in the fourth membrane spanning (S4) region comprise the voltage sensor. An accessory (β) subunit is shown to the right. 
ION CHANNELS 
Structure and Function of Voltage-Gated Ion Channels 
Voltage-gated ion channels allow the flow of ions in response to changes in transmembrane voltage and are key elements in regulating neuronal excitation. Although ion channels can usually pass more than a single ionic species, voltage-gated channels are named according to their predominant permeant ion, and neurons express ion channels selective for Na+, K+, Ca2+, or Cl−. Certain ion channels, including those opened by chemical neurotransmitters such as glutamate and acetylcholine, are selective for positively charged ions (Na+, K+, and Ca2+) but exclude Cl−, and are called nonselective cation channels. To give some idea about the complexity and diversity of the “voltage-gated ion channel superfamily,” it is estimated that this group of proteins has more than 140 members, and data from the human genome project (HGP) predict that there may be more than 300 ion channels. Only the families of GPCRs and protein kinases have more members. The International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology (IUPHAR) maintains a website with updated nomenclature on ion channels and receptors. 
Sodium (Na+) Channels 
Na+ channels are responsible for the fast upstroke of neuronal action potentials. In some neurons, Na+ channels also contribute to smaller depolarizations and pacemaker firing. Pacemaker activity refers to the ability of some neurons to depolarize spontaneously and to coordinate activity in a network of connected cells. Na+ channels activate (open) rapidly in response to depolarization and most also inactivate rapidly and nearly completely in response to prolonged depolarization. 
Na+ channels cloned from rat brain have three protein subunits—a main (or α) subunit with a molecular weight of 240 to 280 kiloDaltons (kDa) and two minor (β) subunits with molecular weights of 30 to 40 kDa expressed in a 1:1:1 ratio. The α-subunit is a glycoprotein consisting of four structurally similar (homologous) domains that have six membrane- spanning (transmembrane) domains, referred to as S1 to S6 (Figs. 1.10–5 and 1.10–6). The α-subunit alone can form a functional channel. Unlike voltage-gated K+ channels, which are tetramers of distinct subunits with 

========445========

each subunit containing six transmembrane domains, functional sodium channels arise from a single α-subunit gene product. There are at least 10 mammalian genes that encode sodium channel α-subunits. These channels are named Nav 1.1 to 1.9 and Nax. Nav 1.1 to 1.3 and Nav 1.6 to 1.9 are neuronal channels while Nav 1.4 is expressed in muscle and Nav 1.5 is expressed in heart. Some neuronal channels are expressed primarily in the CNS, others in the PNS. The properties of voltage dependence, ion permeation, pharmacological sensitivity, activation, and inactivation are conferred by specific regions of these proteins. 
FIGURE 1.10–6. The diagram depicts the arrangement of the four homologous repeats (I to IV) in the cell membrane. The view is looking at the channel en face from the outside of the cell. Transmembrane helices are labeled 1 to 6. Extracellular linker regions are depicted by connecting lines. The P-loop is depicted as the linker between S5 and S6. Note the P- domains from each of the four homologous repeats contribute to lining the ion channel located at the center of the diagram. 
Relationships between primary protein structure and ion channel function in Na+ channels have been examined using mutations of specific amino acid residues. Both the amino- and carboxy-terminals of the α- subunits are located intracellularly. The fourth membrane-spanning region 

========446========

(S4), which contains several electrically charged amino acid residues, plays a key role in sensing transmembrane voltage changes that allow channel opening. Between the S5 and S6 membrane-spanning regions, there is a segment of hydrophobic amino acids that does not completely cross the lipid membrane bilayer. This group of amino acids (called a “P-loop”) forms the lining of the ion channel PORE (Figs. 1.10–5 and 1.10–6). The P- loop is a feature shared by other voltage-gated ion channels and some nonselective cation channels (Figs. 1.10–7 and 1.10–9). A short intracellular loop between the third and fourth homologous domains plays a role in channel inactivation and physically blocks the ion pore during longer periods of depolarization. A high-resolution crystal structure of a bacterial Na+ channel (NavAb) provides insights into structure–function relationships. This channel has a large external vestibule, a narrow ion selectivity filter, and a large, water-filled central cavity lined by S6 segments. The ion selectivity filter is formed by negatively charged side chains of glutamate residues that remove most, but not all, waters of Na+ hydration. An intracellular activation gate involves crossing parts of the S6 segments. 

========447========

FIGURE 1.10–7.Potassiumchannelshavediversemolecularstructures.Fourfamiliesof K+ channels defined by the number of transmembrane domains and number of P-domains are shown. Of the channels described in the text, classical depolarization-gated K+ channels and KCNQ subunits are members of the six transmembrane (TM) domain, 1 P-domain family. Some Ca2+-dependent K+ channels are also members of this family, but the BK Ca2+ and voltage-dependent channels are members of a separate family because of an extra transmembrane domain and an extracellular N-terminus. Inward rectifiers, including KATP and astrocyte leak channels, are members of the 2 transmembrane domain, 1 P-domain family. The tandem pore (or TWIK) family of K+ channels has four membrane-spanning regions and two P-domains. 

========448========

Sodium channel β-subunits (termed β1 to β4) are glycoproteins with a large extracellular amino terminus, a single transmembrane domain, and a short intracellular carboxy terminus. Two β-subunits associate with a single α-subunit and regulate functional expression, channel kinetics and gating. The large extracellular N-terminus is involved in cell adhesion via an immunoglobulin-like fold. A mutation in a cysteine residue in this extracellular fold is linked to a form of familial epilepsy. 
Na+ channels contain at least seven sites at which neurotoxins and clinical drugs act. Most, but not all, Na+ channels contain an extracellular site at which tetrodotoxin (TTX) and saxitoxin (STX) block ion flow. TTX is a neurotoxin isolated from puffer fish that is used experimentally to block Na+ channel function. At a site on Na+ channels distinct from the TTX site, α-scorpion and sea anemone toxins act to modulate gating. α-scorpion toxins slow channel inactivation while β-scorpion toxins, acting at a distinct site, shift the voltage of activation and allow channels to open at voltages closer to the resting potential. The net effect of the scorpion toxins is to enhance excitation, contributing to the increased firing in pain fibers and paralysis associated with a scorpion sting. Mutations in α-subunits of skeletal muscle Na+ channels cause the human disorder hyperkalemic periodic paralysis. Like anemone and α-scorpion toxins, these mutations slow channel inactivation. 
Other toxins from the buttercup family (aconitine), the lily family (veratridine) and frogs used for arrow poisons in South America (batrachotoxin) promote direct opening of Na+ channels and prolong the duration that channels stay open. The net effect is similar to the scorpion toxins. Finally, certain local anesthetic drugs, including lidocaine and procaine, block Na+ channels by binding to sites within the hydrophobic regions of the ion channel. The blockade of Na+ channels contributes to local anesthetic effects and to antiarrhythmic effects in the heart. Certain clinically important anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, lamotrigine, phenytoin, riluzole) bind a site similar to that bound by procaine, and have become important psychotherapeutic agents. All blockers mentioned, with the exceptions of TTX and STX, block Na+ channels in a use-dependent manner. That is, the drugs become more effective as cells become more depolarized. Mechanistically, this may be achieved by drugs stabilizing an inactivated state (conformation) of the channel. This may lead to a clinically beneficial situation where normal CNS activity is relatively spared by the drugs, but abnormal hyperexcitation is blocked. Further clinical benefit from these drugs may result from their ability to dampen excitatory synaptic transmission selectively while sparing inhibitory transmission by mechanisms not fully understood. It is important to emphasize that not all Na+ channels in neurons are sensitive to all of the above agents. For example, TTX-insensitive Na+ channels exist in some excitable cells and 

========449========

play a prominent role in certain nociceptive neurons. 
Potassium (K+) Channels 
K+ channels are the most diverse family of ion channels and determine the resting and firing properties of neurons. At least 75 different K+ channels are expressed in various cells. Among these are 40 mammalian genes for voltage-activated K+ channels grouped in 12 families according to their major (α) subunit (termed Kv1 to Kv12). The various families have distinct properties and structural motifs (Fig. 1.10–7). These include six- transmembrane domain/one P-domain channel subunits (classical depolarization-gated channels), inwardly rectifying channel subunits with two transmembrane domains, two-pore channel subunits with 4 transmembrane domains, and two-pore channel subunits with eight transmembrane domains (found in invertebrates). A fifth class of K+ channels is a group of calcium and depolarization-gated channels known as BK (for their big single-channel conductance); these channels are similar to six-transmembrane domain channels but also contain a seventh membrane-spanning domain (S0 region) and an extracellular amino terminus. Adding to the diversity, there is evidence for both homo- and heteromeric K+ channels. There are also several auxiliary subunits (β1 to β3) that associate with the α-subunits in a α4β4 stoichiometry. Based on crystallographic studies, K+ channels have served as a model for relating protein structure to the functional properties of ion flow and channel gating. The diversity of potassium channels is daunting, and molecular and structural differences among these channels have broad functional implications. Perhaps more than any other class of ion channels, K+ channels shape the pattern of membrane potential changes in response to input signals. 
K+ channels with six transmembrane domains are particularly important in neurons, with depolarization-gated channels representing a major subgroup within the family. The voltage-gated K+ channel group is divided into subfamilies, KV1 (sometimes called Shaker for the Drosophila gene), KV2 (Shab) KV3 (Shal), and KV4 (Shaw), each with constituent subunits (e.g., KV1.1 to 1.4). A functional channel contains four subunits (a tetramer) from within the same subfamily. Specific domains within the amino terminal regions are responsible for forming tetramers. Likewise, domains within the individual subunits modulate gating, inactivation, and interactions with accessory proteins. 
A common structural motif among voltage-gated K+ channels is the presence of six transmembrane domains (called S1 to S6) with a reentrant loop (P-domain) between S4 and S5. The reentrant loops of the four subunits coordinate to line the ion channel pore. Carbonyl groups in the P- 

========450========

domain directly interact with K+ and determine ion selectivity. These interactions mimic the hydration shell for K+, and no water molecules intervene between K+ and the carbonyl groups, differing from ion selectivity in Na+ channels. The specificity of the interactions within the channel imparts selectivity for K+ over other ions, and high efficacy channel permeation involves electrostatic ion–ion repulsion between adjacent K+. Not surprisingly, the reentrant loop motif is common to all other families of K+ channels, including the two P-domain families and inwardly rectifying K+ channels. 
Voltage-gated K+ channels help to define the electrophysiological “signature,” the characteristic spike shape and firing pattern, of neurons. The fast repolarization mediated by certain K+ channels allows an increased rate of action potential firing that can then be used in frequency- dependent information coding (Fig. 1.10–8). Most neurons express multiple types of K+ channels that differ in activation and inactivation kinetics, voltage dependence, and pharmacology. Because the equilibrium potential for K+ is about −90 mV, the opening of K+ channels results in K+ efflux, membrane hyperpolarization, and a decrease in excitability. 
The first K+ channel identified was called a delayed rectifier. These channels were predicted in the experiments of Hodgkin and Huxley on squid giant axons and were so named because their currents activate more slowly than the Na+ channels that produce the upstroke of the action potential (i.e., channel opening is “delayed” relative to Na+ channel opening). A “rectifier” (diode) is an electrical device that passes current better at certain voltages than at others; in other words, conductance varies with voltage. The K+ current is described as a rectifier because the channel is more effective in allowing K+ ions to exit than to enter the cell, by virtue of depolarization opening the channels. Delayed rectifier channels show little inactivation during prolonged depolarization. These channels help to determine the frequency with which neurons fire action potentials. For instance, “fast-spiking” interneurons of the hippocampus and cortex possess a rapidly activating and deactivating delayed rectifier channel encoded by Kv3 family members. These channels are largely responsible for the narrow spike and brief refractory period of this interneuron class. Structurally, delayed rectifiers are members of the six-transmembrane K+ channel subfamily. 

========451========

FIGURE 1.10–8. The traces show the effect of inhibiting K+ channels involved in action potential repolarization. The traces were constructed using a simulation program that includes nongated leak channels and voltage-gated sodium and potassium channels similar to those described by Hodgkin and Huxley. The simulation includes a sustained depolarizing current injection of fixed amplitude to elicit spiking. The gray traces show the effect of reducing the delayed rectifier potassium conductance (gK) to 25 percent of the initial baseline level (black traces). Note that with fewer voltage-gated potassium channels, the cell is hyperexcitable, exhibiting more action potentials to the same depolarizing input. The bottom panel shows the first 7 milliseconds of the simulations superimposed. Following K+ channel block, individual action potentials are broadened and show a diminished undershoot. 

========452========

Early experiments in squid axons indicated that delayed rectifier currents were the primary K+ currents involved in action potential repolarization. In neurons, the situation is more complex, with rapidly activating K+ channels contributing significantly. These include two classes of calcium-activated K+ channels that are opened by increases in intracellular Ca2+ (some are also opened by depolarization). These channels are important in action potential repolarization and in generating an AHP characteristic of some neurons. In cells that possess it, this AHP is responsible for the accommodation (adaptation) that diminishes repetitive action potential firing during prolonged depolarization (Fig. 1.10–8). The AHP has several temporal components that are mediated by BK (big conductance) and SK (small conductance) calcium-activated K+ channels. BK channels mediate the fast component of the AHP and have a large single channel conductance. BK channels belong to the SLO family of channels named for the slowpoke gene in Drosophila and include Ca2+-, Na+-, and H+-sensitive K+ channels. The large conductance of these channels results from a ring of negative charges in the inner and outer pore regions and a large inner pore. Some evidence suggests an association between a defect in the α-subunit of BK channels and autism with mental retardation. SK channels (SK1 to 3 in the CNS) are gated by intracellular Ca2+ but are voltage insensitive, and contribute to the medium and slow components of the AHP. Some evidence has associated SK channel variants with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. 
A-Type K+ channels rapidly activate with depolarization to potentials above −60 mV and rapidly inactivate at depolarized potentials. A-channels are involved in setting the interspike frequency with which neurons can fire and contribute to action potential repolarization. They are important for frequency coding, the encoding of input strength in the firing frequency of a neuron. The Shaker A-channel from Drosophila was the first K+ channel cloned. 
M-Channels are K+ channels that are activated in a time- and voltage- dependent fashion and are inhibited by the neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, acting at muscarinic receptors. These channels are slow to activate and contribute little to action potential repolarization, but their activation at negative membrane potentials helps to slow repetitive firing. In pyramidal neurons, M-channels are expressed in perisomatic regions where they regulate synaptic integration and adaptation to repetitive firing. M-currents arise from heteromeric association of two members of the six- transmembrane domain group, KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 (members of the Kv7 subfamily) and possibly other KCNQ family members. Mutations in KCNQ subunits result in benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC), deafness, and a form of cardiac long QT syndrome. The name of the subunits in this class of channels (KCNQ) derives from their role in long QT syndrome. 

========453========

Retigabine, an anticonvulsant, potently opens M-channels and slows their closing. 
In the sea snail Aplysia californica, certain K+ channels that contribute to action potential repolarization are inhibited by the neurotransmitter serotonin and are called S-channels. The activity of S-channels is diminished during acute behavioral sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia, and studies of the role of these channels in synaptic function provided important insights into the cellular basis of certain forms of learning and memory. 
Some K+ channels (Kir family) are opened by hyperpolarization instead of depolarization. These inward rectifiers (anomalous rectifiers) allow K+ to more easily enter than exit the cell, and strongly rectify near the equilibrium potential for K+. The primary mechanism underlying rectification is channel block by positively charged intracellular magnesium or polyamines. This channel block is relieved by K+ influx through the channel, accounting for rectification that follows the K+ equilibrium potential. Despite their inward rectification, the physiological importance of these channels for neurons likely lies in passing small outward (hyperpolarizing) currents because neurons are rarely hyperpolarized beyond the K+ equilibrium potential. Inward rectifiers are members of the two-transmembrane domain group of K+ channels. This class of K+ channels contains a single pore region and lacks a voltage sensor (Fig. 1.10–7). 
Brain astrocytes and Muller (glial) cells of the retina express inwardly rectifying K+ channels of the Kir4 and possibly Kir2 subfamily that may be responsible for buffering extracellular increases in K+ during neuronal activity. Expression of the inward rectifiers in these cells is positioned to siphon K+ away from axons and axon terminals where extracellular accumulation may occur. The unique gating properties of these channels favor influx of K+. 
An additional feature of K+ channels is that certain neurotransmitters can alter their function via GPCRs. For example, acetylcholine, acting at muscarinic receptors, blocks several K+ currents leading to enhanced excitability. At different muscarinic receptors, acetylcholine activates inwardly rectifying K+ channels in a variety of tissues including heart and brain. In the hippocampus and other brain regions, the neurotransmitters GABA, serotonin, and adenosine indirectly open a class of inwardly rectifying K+ channels. These channels allow divergent synaptic inputs to exert regulatory influences over neuronal firing through a single class of ion channels. 
In peripheral tissues and in some neurons, a class of K+ channels (Kir6 subfamily) is regulated by intracellular ATP. These channels are members 

========454========

of the two transmembrane domain inward rectifier class (Fig. 1.10–7). In the pancreas, KATP channels regulate insulin release and are a site of action of the hypoglycemic sulfonylurea drugs, tolbutamide and glibenclamide, used to treat diabetes mellitus. The hypoglycemic drugs promote insulin release by blocking ATP-sensitive K+ channels. This leads to membrane depolarization, calcium influx, and hormone release. Diazoxide, an antihypertensive drug that increases blood glucose levels, has the opposite effect on pancreatic ATP-sensitive K+ channels, opening the channels and diminishing the release of insulin. The sulfonylurea drugs do not interact directly with Kir subunits of KATP channels, but rather bind to high-affinity sulfonylurea receptors (SURs) that combine with members of the Kir6 family in heteromeric complexes of four Kir subunits and four SURs. KATP channels are also expressed in the CNS and regulate the release of certain neurotransmitters and perhaps determine responses to changes in intracellular energy levels. These channels are also expressed intracellularly in mitochondrial membranes and may play a role in regulating apoptotic cell death. 
HCN (hyperpolarization and cyclic-nucleotide-gated) or H-channels are a class of nonselective cationic channels structurally related to K+ channels. These channels are strongly expressed in certain neurons, including dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra and VTA, cells implicated in motor behavior, arousal, attention, reward, motivation, and addiction. H-currents contribute to resting membrane potential and pacemaker firing in certain neurons. H-currents are also expressed in dendrites of some pyramidal neurons and, along with other classes of voltage-gated channels, modulate synaptic signals in dendrites. HCN channels are similar to Kir channels in that they activate at hyperpolarized voltages and close with depolarization. HCN channels differ in being permeable to both K+ and Na+, providing a depolarizing current at membrane potentials near rest. H-channels help stabilize neuronal membrane potentials, resisting changes that depolarize or hyperpolarize the cell. The anticonvulsant and mood stabilizer, lamotrigine, activates dendritic H-channels in pyramidal neurons as one of its mechanisms of action, and the anesthetic, psychotomimetic, and rapidly acting antidepressant drug, ketamine, blocks these channels at concentrations relevant to its clinical effects. HCN channels have a structure that differs from Kir channels but is similar to other voltage-activated channels with six membrane-spanning regions, an S4 voltage sensor, and a reentrant P-loop. H-channels have an intracellular cyclic nucleotide binding domain near the carboxy terminus, and the binding of cyclic AMP shifts the voltage range for channel gating. 
The K+ channels described above have either two- or six- 

========455========

transmembrane regions and a single P-loop. Another class of K+ channels has four-membrane spanning regions and two P-domains (Fig. 1.10–7). These tandem pore (K2P) channels are widely expressed in the CNS and periphery, and serve, at least in part, as leak conductances that help to establish the resting membrane potential. Eighteen members of this family have been identified and it is believed that these proteins form functional dimers. The various K2P channels vary in electrical properties and in sensitivity to activators (e.g., neurotransmitters, arachidonic acid, protons, heat, stretch) and modulators (second messengers). These channels go by a variety of names based on the TWIK (tandem pore weak inward rectifying K+) channels that were the first cloned. For example, TWIK-related arachidonic acid-sensitive K+ channels are called TRAAKs, while acid- sensitive channels are called TASKs. These channels are activated by certain volatile anesthetics and anticonvulsants (riluzole), contributing to CNS-depressant effects of these agents. 
Compared to voltage- and transmitter-sensitive channels, members of the TWIK family are activated by a variety of novel stimuli including acidic pH, heat, and mechanical activity. Another class of channels, called ASICs (acid-sensing ion channels), is also responsive to these stimuli. ASICs have two transmembrane domains with an apparent reentrant loop between. At least nine mammalian family members falling into five subfamilies have been identified. Unlike TWIKs, ASICs are voltage-insensitive cation channels that are more permeable to Na+ than to K+ and least permeable to Ca2+. While information about the function of these channels is limited, ASICs appear to form functional trimers and participate in peripheral sensory processing including touch, heat, taste, and pain, and also contribute to certain forms of long-term synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus and amygdala, where they are involved in fear-associated learning. 
Calcium (Ca2+) Channels 
Ca2+ serves as both an important messenger regulating intracellular chemistry (enzyme activity, metabolism, transmitter release) and as an electrical signal for membrane depolarization. In some neurons, Ca2+ influx can underlie action potentials (“calcium spikes”). Additionally, excessive and prolonged increases in intracellular Ca2+ contribute to neurodegeneration. Under some conditions, prolonged deficiency of Ca2+ influx may also lead to neuronal death, particularly in developing neurons. These features make the regulation of intracellular Ca2+ levels vital to cellular function and survival. 
Voltage-activated Ca2+ channels provide a major source of the Ca2+ signals that regulate cellular function, and, in conjunction with Ca2+- 

========456========

permeable ligand-gated ion channels (e.g., NMDA-type glutamate receptors and neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors), represent major conduits for Ca2+ entry from the extracellular environment. Neurons possess multiple classes of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels that are classified by biophysical and pharmacological properties. Some Ca2+ channels are activated by relatively small depolarizations over the range of −80 to −50 mV and are called low-voltage–activated (LVA, Cav3) Ca2+ channels. These LVA channels inactivate rapidly and are relatively insensitive to dihydropyridine Ca2+ channel blockers, such as nifedipine and nimodipine. LVA channels are also called T-type Ca2+ channels because of their “transient” (inactivating) currents. Because LVA Ca2+ channels are activated at membrane potentials near rest, these channels contribute to burst firing and oscillatory neuronal activity. Oscillatory neuronal firing is important in driving coordinated movements and in maintaining complex behavioral states such as wakefulness. LVA channels are also expressed in neuronal dendrites and contribute to synaptic integration and spike- timing–dependent synaptic plasticity. With a few exceptions, LVA channels do not participate in neurotransmitter release. LVA channels may be a target for the actions of some antipsychotic drugs, and the diphenylbutylpiperidines, pimozide and penfluridol, inhibit LVA channels at concentrations similar to those affecting D2 dopamine receptors. Other antipsychotics also inhibit T-type channels but do so at concentrations above those required at dopamine receptors. 
A second class of Ca2+ channels, called high-voltage–activated Ca2+ channels (HVA, Cav1, and Cav2 family members), is activated by stronger membrane depolarizations to potentials positive to −50 mV. In many neurons, even when Na+ channels involved in the upstroke of action potentials are blocked, HVA Ca2+ channels can produce regenerative spikes. These calcium spikes are slower in onset and longer in duration than Na+ spikes, reflecting the kinetics of HVA channels. 
HVA Ca2+ channels are heterogeneous with several major subtypes. L- type Ca2+ channels (Cav1 family; named for their “long-lasting” responses) show slow inactivation during sustained depolarizations and are sensitive to block by dihydropyridines. L-type channels provide sufficient Ca2+ influx during action potentials to activate Ca2+-dependent second messengers and gene expression. N-type Ca2+ channels (Cav2.2 named because they were “neither” L- nor T-type) are HVA channels involved in regulating neurotransmitter release from some presynaptic structures, particularly those of sensory neurons in the retina and inner ear. N-type channels are blocked irreversibly by ω-conotoxin GVIA, a poison from the snail conus geographus. Another conotoxin, ω-conotoxin MVIIA (Prialt), is a reversible N-channel blocker that is used to treat chronic pain. P/Q-type 

========457========

Ca2+ channels (Cav2.1) are a third class of HVA channels and are named because of their presence in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum and pyramidal neurons of the hippocampus and cortex. P/Q-channels are insensitive to dihydropyridines and ω-conotoxin GVIA but are blocked by ω-Aga-IVA, a toxin from the funnel web spider Agelenopsis aperta. P/Q channels, like N channels, regulate the release of neurotransmitters in the CNS. N- and P/Q-type channels have an intracellular loop between channel domains II and III that binds certain presynaptic proteins including syntaxin 1, Rim, and synaptotagmin 1. This site is referred to as a “synprint” region and plays a role in allowing synaptic proteins to modulate channel function. 
R-Type Ca2+ channels (Cav2.3) also contribute to CNS function, but their actions are less well understood. R-type channels are resistant to the Ca2+ channel antagonists described above, but are inhibited by SNX-482, a toxin derived from the African tarantula Hysterocrates gigas. Although their presynaptic role is not as prominent as N and P/Q channels, R- channels participate in transmitter release at fast excitatory synaptic synapses in the CNS. 
The cloning of specific Ca2+ channel subunits has provided insights into the structural mechanisms of these channels and highlighted even further complexity than outlined above. Skeletal muscle HVA Ca2+ channels were the first cloned and serve as a model for understanding the structure of other voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. These channels are involved in excitation–contraction coupling at neuromuscular junctions and consist of five distinct subunits termed α1 (165 to 195 kDa), α2 (~150 kDa), δ (17 to 25 kDa), β (50 to 60 kDa), and γ (25 to 35 kDa) arranged in a 1:1:1:1:1 stoichiometry. The δ-subunit is produced by cleavage of α2/δ peptides while the other subunits are encoded by separate genes. α1-subunits have about 30 percent sequence homology to voltage-gated Na+ channels and form the ion channel pore. A recurring theme in α1-subunits is the existence of four homologous internal repeats that each contains six putative membrane-spanning regions and a pore-forming P-loop (Figs. 1.10–5 and 1.10–6). The HVA α1 Ca2+ channel subunit from skeletal muscle contains the dihydropyridine binding site. Point mutations in the α1- subunit of skeletal muscle T-tubule Ca2+ channels (Cav1.1) and the skeletal muscle Na+ channel (Nav1.4) cause the human disorder, hypokalemic periodic paralysis. The critical mutations occur in the S4 region of the channel involved in voltage sensing and result in a gain of function current that is open at rest and results in membrane depolarization and action potential failure. Similar gating pore mutations may occur in other channelopathies. The functions of the β (β1–4) and γ (γ1 
to 8) 
subunits are less certain, but appear to regulate membrane expression and trafficking of α1-subunits. Loss of the γ2-subunit (stargazin) in the stargazer mutant 

========458========

mouse markedly diminishes cell surface expression of certain glutamate receptors. The importance of auxiliary subunits in the function of Ca2+ channels is highlighted by recent evidence that analgesic effects of the anticonvulsants gabapentin and pregabalin involve binding to specific residues in α2–δ1 subunits. 
α1-subunits differ structurally among the different Ca2+ channel subtypes and 10 different α1 genes have been cloned. These include four different α1 subtypes contributing to L-type channels (Cav1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4), three α1 genes contributing to P/Q-, N-, and R-type channels (Cav2.1, 2.2, 2.3), and three variants of T-type Ca2+ channels (Cav3.1, 3.2, 3.3). Adding to this complexity, human genes typically go by other names. For example, the skeletal muscle L-type channel Cav 1.1 is referred to as α1S and CACNA1S; other human calcium channel genes are named accordingly. The importance of calcium channels to neuropsychiatric disorders is highlighted by the finding that mutations in the human CACNA1A gene encoding the α1 subunit of P/Q calcium channels are associated with familial hemiplegic migraine. 
An important question in ion channel biology concerns how channels establish selectivity for one ion over another. At an initial level, ionic charge and charged amino acid residues present in ion channel proteins help to select for cations over anions. It is a more difficult and complex problem, however, for channels to select among different cations. In the case of Ca2+ channels, this is particularly vexing because hydrated Ca2+ ions are significantly larger than Na+ or K+ ions. Thus, size of the ion channel pore cannot determine selectivity for Ca2+. Rather, selectivity in Ca2+ channels involves high-affinity binding of divalent cations within the ion channel. When Ca2+ is present, its binding within the pore excludes monovalent cations, rendering the channels selective for Ca2+. As might be expected, when Ca2+ is not present, these channels will pass monovalent cations. This principle of ions binding to specific sites within a channel to regulate permeability and gating is a recurring theme in ion channel biology that can sometimes be exploited for the development of drugs that modulate channel function. 
In some regions of the CNS, particularly retinal photoreceptors and olfactory epithelial cells, intracellular cyclic nucleotides (e.g., cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP) gate specific classes of ion channels. These cyclic nucleotide–gated (CNG) channels have structural features similar to voltage-gated channels, including the presence of six membrane-spanning regions and a P-loop that lines the ion channel. CNG channels also have an S4-like voltage sensing region, although the channels are not regulated by voltage. Three α and three β CNG subunits have been cloned. CNG channels are nonselectively permeable to cations, but like voltage-gated 

========459========

calcium channels bind divalent cations in the extracellular pore region. The binding of divalent cations restricts the flow of monovalent cations through CNG channels much like voltage-activated Ca2+ channels rendering them relatively selective for Ca2+ over Na+. In some respects, CNG channels are similar to HCN channels, but are described in this section because of their higher calcium permeability. Mutations in retinal photoreceptor CNG channels contribute to color blindness in humans. 
The TRP superfamily represents another class of cationic channels with six membrane-spanning regions and high calcium permeability. This family contains more than 25 members in at least seven subfamilies (TRPC, TRPV, TRPM, TRPML, TRPP, TRPA, and TRPN) that participate in multiple processes in the nervous system and in nonexcitable cells, ranging from sensory processing to vascular and cell cycle control. TRP channels are named for the first member to be identified, the trp (transient receptor potential) gene in Drosophila, and have been linked to several human disorders including polycystic kidney disease and mucolipidosis, a neurodegenerative illness. TRP channels are regulated by intracellular and extracellular signals including changes in pH, temperature, capsaicin (the active ingredient in hot peppers) and anandamide (an endogenous ligand for cannabinoid receptors). Endogenous lipid mediators like the endocannabinoid, anandamide, are important regulators of the TRPC/VM subfamilies. TRP family members (TRPC1 and TRPC4) may also contribute to “store-operated” channels that mediate extracellular calcium influx following calcium release from intracellular stores. However, other proteins, Orai and Stim1, are more essential components of this source of Ca2+ influx. 
Chloride (Cl−) Channels 
In most neurons, Cl− is present at higher concentrations outside than inside cells, and the equilibrium potential for Cl− is near the resting membrane potential. Thus, the opening of Cl− channels tends to keep the membrane potential near rest, and in conjunction with K+ channels, serves as a mechanism to dampen neuronal excitability. Some Cl− channels also conduct bicarbonate, another physiological anion. Cl− channels contribute to the resting membrane potential in certain neurons and muscle cells. These channels are spontaneously open at resting membrane potentials and exhibit weak voltage dependence. In muscle fibers, the background Cl− conductance is the largest resting conductance and the distribution of Cl− is near equilibrium. Cl− channels fall into three main gene families, voltage- gated Cl− channels (ClCs), the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), and ligand-gated Cl− channels. The ClC family includes nine different channels that have a structure unlike any cation channel. 

========460========

ClCs have 10 or 12 membrane-spanning regions and, while several of the transmembrane regions participate in ion channel pore formation, there is no defined S4 voltage sensing region as in voltage-gated cation channels. Crystallographic studies indicate that ClC channels are double-barreled homodimers with each subunit containing its own pore. In the human illness, myotonia congenita, an abnormality of a muscle Cl− channel (ClC-1) results in abnormally low Cl− conductance leading to increased muscular excitability and fatigue with exercise. 
There are at least five activating stimuli for Cl− channels. These include changes in membrane voltage (depolarization or hyperpolarization), increases in intracellular Ca2+, ligand binding (usually GABA or glycine), cellular swelling, and phosphorylation by cyclic-AMP–dependent protein kinase (PKA). Ca2+-activated Cl− channels may help to determine the interspike frequency of neuronal firing, while swelling-activated channels help to protect cells from damage during osmotic stress. These channels are pentamers with a single ion pore and a hydrophobic neck that forms the channel gate controlling ion flow. Ca2+ binds to a large cytosolic region of the protein to regulate channel opening. Cl− channels also serve important functions in secretory cells, providing a major source of Cl− in tears, sweat, and digestive juices. A defect in CFTR secretory Cl− channels that renders the channels insensitive to activating stimuli is important in cystic fibrosis. CFTR has a structure that differs from the ClC family and belongs to a larger family of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) proteins that require phosphorylation by PKA and hydrolysis of ATP for activation. CFTR is the only member of the ABC family that also serves as a Cl− channel. Structurally, CFTR has two repeats with six membrane-spanning regions (12 transmembrane regions in total), a nucleotide binding domain and a regulatory domain. 
Mitochondrial membranes express unique voltage-dependent anion channels (VDACs) that pass negatively charged ions and have unusual gating properties, being open at potentials near 0 mV and closing with voltage changes in either direction. VDACs (or porins) participate in releasing metabolites from mitochondria and are components of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP) that regulates apoptotic cell death. PTP is a multiprotein complex that includes adenine nucleotide translocase, hexokinase, cyclophilin D, and a VDAC. PTP activity is regulated by peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptors present on mitochondria. VDACs may also be expressed in plasma membranes, particularly in postsynaptic densities, and these channels may complex with some neurotransmitter receptors, although the function of plasma membranes VDACs remains uncertain. Three VDACs (VDAC 1 to 3) have been cloned and are β-sheet proteins that differ from the α-helical configuration of most ion channels. 

========461========

NEUROTRANSMITTERS AND ION CHANNELS 
Classes of Neurotransmitters 
Most information transfer between neurons occurs via chemical synapses. These connections use a wide array of chemical messengers (neurotransmitters) that are released in a Ca2+-dependent fashion from presynaptic terminals and act on specific membrane proteins (receptors) to produce biochemical and excitability changes in the receiving cell. There are two primary groups of neurotransmitters—low–molecular-weight amines and neuroactive peptides. These agents act on two classes of receptors, ligand-gated ion channels, at which binding of the transmitter directly opens an ion channel, and GPCRs, where an activated G-protein modulates ion channels or alters biochemical second messenger systems. Physiologists classify synaptic transmission according to the speed of transmission (fast or slow) and according to the excitability change (excitatory or inhibitory). Fast transmission occurs on a time scale of up to several 100 milliseconds and is mediated primarily by amine neurotransmitters acting at ligand-gated ion channels. Slow synaptic communication occurs on a scale of seconds to minutes or longer, usually through the actions of amine or peptide transmitters acting on GPCRs. The specific ion channels involved and the electrochemical gradients of the permeant ions determine whether effects are excitatory (depolarizing) or inhibitory (hyperpolarizing). Moreover, an excitatory synaptic input can exert a net inhibitory influence on regional excitability and vice versa. For example, release of an excitatory neurotransmitter onto an inhibitory neuron can stimulate the inhibitory neuron and dampen activity of a local population of cells. Conversely, inhibition of inhibitory neurons can enhance regional excitability. These features provide great flexibility in regulating circuit activity. 
There are at least nine low-molecular-weight amines that serve as neurotransmitters. These include glutamate, the major fast excitatory transmitter in the mammalian brain, acetylcholine, the excitatory transmitter at the vertebrate neuromuscular junction, GABA, and glycine, the major fast inhibitory transmitters in the brain and spinal cord, respectively, and the biogenic amines dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, serotonin, and histamine. Purines, ATP, can also act as transmitters. A large number of neuroactive peptides modulate neuronal excitability. It is uncertain, however, whether all of these substances function as neurotransmitters. Many peptides, including vasopressin and CCK, were first identified as hormones in the vasculature and gut. ATP and certain neuroactive peptides coexist with amine neurotransmitters in some nerve terminals, and can be coreleased. Thus, interactions between classes of neurotransmitters may determine the ultimate effects of a presynaptic neuron on its postsynaptic target. 

========462========

Conductance Mechanisms Underlying Neurotransmitter Actions 
Neurotransmitter actions can also be described by effects on membrane conductances. Transmitters that act at ligand-gated ion channels increase the conductance of cell membranes to specific ions. Excitatory transmitters, such as acetylcholine and glutamate, directly activate nonselective cation channels, increasing the flow of Na+, K+, and in some cases, Ca2+. Because of the mixed permeability of these channels, the reversal potential of the currents generated by the channels is a weighted average of the equilibrium potentials of the individual permeant ions, typically near 0 mV. Thus, at membrane potentials negative to 0 mV, channel opening depolarizes (excites) the cell by allowing inward flow of cations. 
In contrast, the fast inhibitory transmitters, GABA and glycine, open ligand-gated channels permeable to Cl−. Because Cl− usually has an equilibrium potential near the resting membrane potential, opening of these channels “clamps” the membrane potential negative to spike threshold, decreasing (inhibiting) the likelihood of spike initiation and shunting excitatory influences. It can be appreciated, however, that the excitatory or inhibitory nature of transmitter actions is dictated by the electrochemical gradients of the permeant ions. Early in development, many neurons possess a sufficiently high intracellular Cl− concentration that the Cl− equilibrium potential is positive relative to spike threshold, resulting in excitatory effects of GABA and glycine. With development and changes in the expression of specific Cl− transporters, intracellular Cl− levels diminish, and GABA and glycine become inhibitory transmitters. There are pathological conditions, including behavioral stress, that alter the expression of Cl− transporters. Under these conditions, GABA (and Cl− channel opening in general) becomes excitatory. This is thought to contribute to the epileptogenesis associated with human brain tumors. 
A second group of transmitters indirectly increases membrane conductance through G proteins. For example, GABA, serotonin, and adenosine, by binding GPCRs, promote G-protein–mediated opening of inwardly rectifying K+ channels (GIRKs). A third set of transmitter actions involves indirect effects on voltage-gated or leakage ion channels. These transmitters typically decrease membrane conductance by activating chemical second messenger systems via GPCRs. Certain voltage-gated K+ and Ca2+ channels are specific targets of this inhibition, resulting in cellular excitation or inhibition, respectively. Most transmitters that act on GPCRs exert at least some of their effects by these decreased conductance mechanisms. The electrical principles underlying synaptic excitation or inhibition are identical to those described for other ion channels and are based on the relative permeabilities of the ion channels and the equilibrium 

========463========

potentials of the ions involved. 
glutamate, acetylcholine, and 
Several transmitters (e.g., GABA, 
serotonin) act at both ligand-gated ion channels and GPCRs. Thus, receptors for these neurotransmitters and their effects are heterogeneous, with the nature of the effect depending on the specific receptor to which the transmitter binds. Cloning studies have demonstrated that receptors for most neurotransmitters are structurally complex with multiple receptor subtypes being the rule rather than the exception. At the receptor level 
there 
is 
tremendous 
flexibility 
in 
determining 
the effects 
of 
a 
neurotransmitter on a single neuron or on a set of neurons. 
Structure of Neurotransmitter Receptors 
Receptor 
glycosylation 
likely 
in 
determining 
optimal 
Most transmitter-gated ion channels are multimeric proteins consisting of several (usually four or five) subunits that have multiple (two to five) membrane-spanning regions (Fig. 1.10–9). Functional receptors typically have large amino-terminal regions that extend into the aqueous extracellular environment and are sites at which neurotransmitters bind and at which sugar molecules attach to the receptor (glycosylation sites). 
participates 
conformations for channel gating. The intracellular regions of the receptor often contain sites at which phosphate groups can be attached. Phosphorylation is a mechanism by which second messenger systems modulate receptor and ion channel function. Many receptors are multiprotein complexes in which the receptor subunits that comprise the ion channel pore are in physical proximity with intracellular proteins (in some cases 100 or more intracellular proteins). The intracellular proteins regulate receptor trafficking and expression as well as ion channel function and participation in intracellular processes. 
The neuromuscular nicotinic acetylcholine receptor was the first 
transmitter-gated 
channel 
to 
be 
purified 
and 
cloned, 
and 
five 
neuromuscular nicotinic receptor subunits have been identified. Each of these subunits has four membrane-spanning regions and a pair of cysteine residues located 13 amino acids apart in the extracellular region of the protein (Fig. 1.10–9). These cysteine residues form a disulfide bridge that contributes to transmitter binding. The nicotinic ion channel is a nonselective cation channel permeable to Na+, K+, and Ca2+. Membrane- spanning regions form the ion channel with the second transmembrane region lining the channel pore. Muscle nicotinic subunits assemble to form a pentamer with a stoichiometry of α2, β, δ, and γ or ε depending on the age of the animal. Nicotinic receptors are part of a superfamily that includes GABAA, glycine and serotonin-type 3 (5HT-3) receptors. GABAA and glycine receptors are anion-selective, passing primarily Cl− in physiological solutions, whereas nicotinic and 5HT-3 receptors are cation selective. 

========464========

Because all members of the family contain the characteristic extracellular cysteine residues, the family is referred to as the cys-loop family. Differences in charges on amino acids at the entrance to the channel pore determine whether the channel passes cations or anions. A recent crystal structure of a human homomeric β3 GABAA receptor shows the GABA channel to have a cylindrical structure about 110 Å high and 60 to 80 Å wide, extending 65 Å into the extracellular space. A positively charged ring of amino acids halfway down the channel allows anion binding and determines ion selectivity. A closed gate at the base of the pore provides a mechanism for desensitization. Crystal structures are extremely important because they offer the hope of more rational and selective drug design. 
Ligand-gated ion channels gated by extracellular ATP (P2X receptors) are exceptions to the scheme outlined above and have structures more similar to inwardly rectifying K+ channels (Figs. 1.10–7 and 1.10–9). ATP receptors have two membrane-spanning regions and a pore-forming region (P-loop) that are connected by a large loop of extracellular amino acids. A major difference between P2X receptors and inwardly rectifying K+ channels is that P2X receptors are mostly extracellular, whereas the bulk of the K+ channel is intracellular. P2X channels are cation selective and have high Ca2+ permeability. These receptors participate in fast excitatory synaptic transmission in certain regions of the CNS including the thalamus. Native ATP receptors may consist of combinations of P2X subunits. 

========465========

FIGURE 1.10–9. The diagrams show the proposed secondary structure of receptors for several neurotransmitters, including a GABAA receptor (member of the Cys-loop family), an ion-channel–linked glutamate receptor, a channel gated by extracellular ATP (P2X) and a G- protein–coupled receptor (GPCR). The ligand binding domains of these receptors are depicted by the circles in the extracellular regions. 
Ionotropic glutamate receptors are also exceptions to the structural 

========466========

scheme proposed for GABAA and nicotinic receptors. Glutamate receptor subunits have three membrane-spanning regions and a reentrant P-loop between the first and second transmembrane regions that does not completely cross the membrane (Fig. 1.10–9). The P-loops in glutamate- gated channels like those in voltage-gated ion channels line the ion channel. A difference from voltage-gated channels is that the glutamate receptor P-loops enter the membrane from the cytoplasmic side. Crystallographic data on homomeric GluA2 AMPA-type glutamate receptors indicate that these channels contain four subunits, each of which binds a glutamate molecule. Subunits form a dimer of dimers, and the receptor resembles a letter “Y” when viewed perpendicular to the membrane. The glutamate binding region has a hinged cleft resembling a venus flytrap. When agonists bind, the cleft closes to varying degrees depending upon the ligand. This imparts structural changes necessary for ion channel opening. Competitive antagonists that block glutamate binding stabilize the open cleft configuration of the binding pocket, providing an explanation for how an agent can bind to the agonist recognition site but not produce the conformational changes that cause channel opening. A recent crystal structure for heterotetrameric GluN1-GluN2B NMDA receptors has also been generated and reveals differences from AMPA receptors. The crystallized NMDA receptor has a much more tightly packed amino terminal domain and ligand-binding domain, possibly explaining why the amino terminus more effectively regulates ion channel activity in these receptors. In contrast to the Y-like shape of AMPA receptors, NMDA receptors better resemble a hot air balloon with an extracellular “balloon” and a transmembrane “basket.” 
GPCRs have structures that differ completely from ligand-gated ion channels. These receptors have seven membrane-spanning regions (Fig. 1.10–9), and many GPCRs exist as homo- or heterodimers. Transmitter binding occurs in a pocket formed by the intramembranous domains of the receptor, except for the glutamate family of GPCRs, where binding is in a large extracellular amino terminal region. The coupling of GPCRs to their G protein occurs at intracellular loops of the receptor. GPCRs also have sites for glycosylation and phosphorylation. 
CLINICAL ASPECTS OF ION CHANNELS 
CNS information processing depends critically upon ion channels. Most rapid processing involves action potential firing and fast neurotransmission. While it is beyond the scope of this chapter to detail all clinical arenas in which ion channels are important, this chapter highlights some areas where the function of ion channels is particularly important to psychiatry. 
Oscillatory Neuronal Firing and Complex Behavioral States 

========467========

Complex behavioral states, including wakefulness, attention, mood, and sleep require coherent activity within and between neuronal circuits. Neuronal networks show rhythmic activity (oscillation) over a wide range of frequencies from less than 1 to several 100 cycles/s (Hz). These oscillations provide energy efficient mechanisms that determine optimal input and output frequencies and provide coherence in functional networks. Activity in oscillating circuits involves interplay of intrinsic electrical properties of neurons, local balance of excitatory and inhibitory inputs (E/I balance), and sustained effects of more diffusely acting neuromodulator systems including muscarinic and monoaminergic systems. With regard to intrinsic electrical properties, certain neurons have voltage-gated conductances that allow them to fire rhythmically and spontaneously, thus having properties of a pacemaker or oscillator. For example, inferior olivary neurons fire action potentials spontaneously and sustain this firing for relatively long periods in the absence of external inputs. These neurons fire conventional fast Na+ spikes that provide the depolarization needed to open high voltage-activated (HVA) Ca2+ channels. In turn, Ca2+ influx activates a Ca2+-dependent K+ conductance that rapidly hyperpolarizes the membrane. When the membrane hyperpolarizes, LVA Ca2+ channels open and depolarize the membrane potential to threshold for firing Na+ spikes, which then activates another cycle. In the case of inferior olivary neurons, it is the properties of the LVA Ca2+ channels that foster oscillatory firing. LVA channels are inactivated at the neuronal resting membrane potential but become activatable when the membrane is hyperpolarized with respect to rest. In effect, hyperpolarization becomes a priming stimulus that allows LVA channels to open. Pacemaker firing of inferior olivary neurons drives Purkinje neurons in the cerebellum to resonate at the inferior olivary neuron’s preferred firing frequency. This resonating circuit contributes to the physiological resting tremor that oscillates at about 10 cycles per second. 
Pacemaker activity is also found in thalamic neurons where similar, though not identical, mechanisms are used. In the thalamocortical system, network activity is mediated by both intrinsic neuronal conductances and synaptic connections. This activity drives EEG changes during different stages of sleep and vigilance. Thalamocortical neurons exhibit two distinct activity states. During sleep, neurons show synchronized rhythms that resemble delta (1 to 3 Hz activity) and other slow waves on the EEG. During wakefulness and REM sleep, these neurons exhibit tonic activity. LVA calcium channels are important participants in thalamocortical network activity. The transition from sleep to wakefulness is mediated by depolarization of thalamic reticular neurons and inactivation of LVA calcium channels. Specific abnormalities in thalamocortical neurons may also be critical in the generation of 3 Hz spike and wave activity observed in 

========468========

childhood absence epilepsy. In spike-wave discharges, interplay between LVA calcium currents and H-currents appears to be critical in generating abnormal firing. Drugs targeted at these channels (e.g., ethosuximide, an inhibitor of LVA channels and lamotrigine, an activator of H-channels) are useful clinically. Mutations in Cav3.2 LVA channels have been associated with absence of epilepsy. 
In some brain regions, the outputs of pacemaker cells are mediated by fast excitatory or inhibitory transmitters. However, some neurons are capable of firing bursts of action potentials. Bursts are periods of frequent spike firing followed by quiescent periods. This type of firing can be used to drive activity in a local or distributed neural network. Additionally, burst- like firing can provide sufficient intracellular Ca2+ to stimulate release of peptide transmitters. In turn, the slow synaptic actions of the peptides in combination with or independent of other GPCR systems can alter the frequency of oscillatory firing and bursting. An example of this is the repeated firing that occurs when spike frequency adaptation is inhibited by blocking Ca2+-activated K+ conductances. In this case, both the intrinsic electrical properties of neurons and the effect of modulatory transmitters conspire to determine a background level of activity (or tone) in specific neuronal systems. 
Ion Channels and Neuropsychiatric Disorders 
There is increasing evidence that defects in ion channels (called channelopathies) contribute to the pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric illnesses. Channelopathies typically involve altered function of specific ion channels that result from genetic mutations, transcriptional abnormalities, or immune processes. Although many of these illnesses are not purely “psychiatric” disorders, the involvement of specific ion channels in illnesses is instructive for understanding the importance of ion channels in physiology and illnesses. 
Given the importance of ion channels in determining the excitability of neurons, the observation that epilepsy, a group of disorders characterized by recurrent bouts of abnormal paroxysmal electrical activity, is associated with mutations in specific ion channels is not surprising. For example, BFNC are associated with mutations in K+ channel genes, KCNQ2 and KCNQ3. These proteins (Kv7.2, 7.3) form M-channels that produce slowly activating and slowly inactivating K+ currents that blunt neuronal firing. The expression of a single mutant allele of either gene—BFNC is a genetically dominant disorder—decreases channel number sufficiently to result in neuronal hyperexcitability. Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) is an autosomal dominant syndrome that results from mutations in Na+ channel subunits. The role that ion channels play in these rare genetic syndromes suggests that idiopathic epilepsy might also 

========469========

be a channelopathy resulting from an interaction between genetic defects in ion channels and adverse environmental effects. A recent exome sequencing study examined more than 230 channel genes in sporadic idiopathic epilepsy, the most common neuronal excitability disorder. This study reported rare missense variants in both epilepsy patients and unaffected individuals, including deleterious mutations in both groups. These results strongly suggest that the ion channel genes confer uncertain illness risk and that illness expression depends on other variants, even though the ion channel defects likely contribute. Identification of defective channel genes, nonetheless, offers an opportunity to improve clinical outcomes based on individualized treatment. 
The calcium channel CACNA1A gene, which encodes the α1-subunit of HVA P/Q-type Ca2+ channels (Cav2.1), is associated with several rare genetic diseases. Familial hemiplegic migraine is an autosomal dominant form of migraine with childhood onset and an aura that includes transient hemiparesis or hemiplegia lasting hours to days. Otherwise, the headache is indistinguishable from other migraine syndromes associated with aura. In some families, the disorder is associated with progressive ataxia. Familial hemiplegic migraine is genetically heterogeneous with about 50 percent of cases involving mutations in CACNA1A. The heterogeneity extends to the molecular level with more than a dozen mutations associated with illness risk. The effect of the mutations was anticipated to result in a gain-of-function, given the pathological impact of the single mutant allele. However, expression of mutant genes in heterologous systems reveals a more complex picture with the most frequently identified mutation reducing Ca2+ currents, presumably a loss-of-function, and another mutation associated with increased Ca2+ flux, or gain-of-function. Episodic ataxia type 2 (EAT2) is another dominant disorder associated with mutations in CACNA1A. Patients with EAT2 experience episodes of nystagmus and ataxia lasting hours to days; for some, the disorder is progressive and associated with cerebellar atrophy. About 50 percent of patients have migraine. Although most mutations associated with EAT2 grossly disrupt protein expression, several are point mutations that change a single amino acid. Expression of the gene with one of the point mutations in a heterologous system results in complete loss of function without a change in protein expression. Finally, a type of autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA6) is linked to a mutation leading to an expanded series of glutamine residues in the carboxyl terminus of the Cav2.1 protein. It is perhaps easier to conceptualize the mutant protein producing a chronic condition such as ataxia rather than an episodic disorder such as migraine or epilepsy because the P/Q channel regulates transmitter release in cerebellar circuits responsible for gait. It is conceivable that the P/Q mutations associated with migraine are important 

========470========

for the function of a neural circuit activated by adverse environmental exposure and/or dependent on a transmitter such as serotonin (thought to be involved in pathogenesis of migraine). The various syndromes associated with altered CACNA1A gene highlight the heterogeneity that is expected from exploration of genes for psychiatric disorders. 
Genetic studies indicate that certain pain syndromes are also channelopathies involving altered Na+ channel function and expression. Mutations in the SCN9A gene on chromosome 2 that encodes Nav1.7 are implicated in both paroxysmal extreme pain disorder (PEPD) and congenital inability to experience pain. In the case of PEPD, the causative mutations result in fast inactivation of the channel with a persisting tonic Na+ current. In the pain insensitivity disorder, the mutations result in a loss of function. These syndromes are instructive not only from the perspective of ion channels and disease but also in guiding future work aimed at developing more specific pain therapies. 
Studies examining ion channels in psychiatric disorders remain in their infancy. There is evidence that polymorphisms in SK type calcium- activated K+ channels are associated with certain forms of psychosis. A polymorphism in the KCNH2 gene that encodes a K+ channel is also associated with schizophrenia and predicts lower intelligence and altered memory-related changes in functional neuroimaging. Other work suggests the involvement of BK channels in a form of autism and mental retardation, and mutations in T-type (LVA) calcium channels have been linked to autism. Similarly, a polymorphism in the α5 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is linked to nicotine dependence. This latter polymorphism is in a coding region of the protein in a position that influences ion channel kinetics. A recent large-scale study revealed genetic loci in schizophrenia that likely code several voltage-gated ion channels including α1 C- and β2-subunits of L-type (HVA) Ca2+ channels, Kv2.1 delayed rectifier K+ channels, ClC-3 voltage-activated Cl− channels, and HCN1 channels, among others. These observations suggest that understanding how genetic and environmental factors influence membrane excitability will play an increasing role in psychiatry. Changes in ion channel function are likely to contribute to diagnosis, pathophysiology, and response to psychotropic medications, including predispositions to serious side effects including cardiac arrhythmias. 
“E/I Balance” and Psychiatric Illnesses 
A principle emerging from modern genetics is that certain psychiatric illnesses, including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, developmental cognitive disorders, and autism share genetic risk factors and that genes associated with these complex disorders involve pathways that regulate neuronal excitability and synaptic function. Anatomical studies indicate 

========471========

that some of these psychiatric illnesses also involve abnormalities in inhibitory interneurons that use GABA as a neurotransmitter and that regulate regional excitability. These observations have led to hypotheses about neurocircuitry defects that underlie the disorders. One hypothesis posits that the various disorders involve shifts in the relative degrees of regional excitation and inhibition (referred to as E/I balance). According to this hypothesis, both synaptic and intrinsic excitability changes contribute to neurocircuitry abnormalities. In schizophrenia and autism, there appears to be augmented excitation relative to inhibition in certain brain regions, and this increased E/I ratio may account for abnormal hyperactivity in frontal and hippocampal circuits that underlie cognitive and social defects. This E/I balance hypothesis is consistent with functional neuroimaging findings and increases in high-frequency cortical oscillations recorded by electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalograhy (MEG). Changes in beta and gamma oscillations (activity above 20 Hz) are thought to underlie defects in sensory processing and learning, and inefficient information transfer within and between neural networks. Specific classes of inhibitory GABAergic interneurons play a critical role in regulating these high-frequency rhythms by influencing the firing frequency of excitatory glutamatergic (pyramidal) neurons. 
There are few direct tests of the E/I balance hypothesis in humans, but studies using optogenetic methods in mouse models have provided tentative support (see below). Studies using bistable step function opsins to depolarize specific neuronal types for prolonged periods have reproduced increases in high frequency (30 to 80 Hz) cortical gamma oscillations and some altered social behaviors akin to those observed in human illnesses. These electrical and behavioral changes are reversed by increasing the activity of specific GABAergic inhibitory interneurons that express the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin (PV). PV+ interneurons are fast spiking cells and a model for understanding how expression of specific classes of ion channels drives unique function, allowing interneurons to regulate rhythmic activity within and across brain regions. Simulation studies provide further support for the E/I hypothesis and indicate that local feedback inhibition enhances information capacity and discrimination accuracy of more global and distributed networks. These studies suggest that local E/I balance within brain regions helps to regulate regional spontaneous activity and information transfer across brain regions at large- scale levels. 
While the E/I balance hypothesis is still not proven and may represent an overly simplistic view, this conceptualization is having a significant influence on clinical neuroscience. Efforts to manipulate E/I balance and the plasticity of excitatory (glutamate) synapses are leading to novel ideas about the treatment of developmental neurocognitive disorders that have heretofore proven therapeutically intractable, including fragile X 

========472========

syndrome, Rett syndrome, and ASDs, among others. 
Neuronal Activity and the Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
Ion channels play major roles in brain development. During development, more neurons are produced than are needed for mature functioning. Depending on the region involved, 50 percent or more of neurons normally do not survive, and die by a process of programmed (apoptotic) cell death that is regulated in part by electrical activity. This activity involves intrinsic action potential firing mediated by voltage-activated ion channels, and synaptic transmission, particularly excitatory synaptic input. When intrinsic neuronal activity is inhibited by blocking voltage-activated sodium or calcium channels, neurons undergo apoptotic neuronal degeneration. Studies in rodents indicate that agents that diminish glutamate-mediated synaptic transmission, particularly the component mediated by NMDA receptors, cause massive abnormal loss of neurons throughout the forebrain during the period of synaptogenesis. Treatments that enhance GABA-mediated inhibition also promote neuronal apoptosis during the same developmental period. Multiple clinically used and abused drugs modulate voltage-gated ion channels, NMDA receptors, and GABA receptors, and these drugs promote developmental neuronal apoptosis. For example, ketamine-like drugs that inhibit NMDA ion channels are potently neurotoxic in rodents when administered on a single day during synaptogenesis. Similar neurotoxicity is observed with benzodiazepines and barbiturates that act via GABAA receptors. General anesthetic and anticonvulsants dampen brain electrical activity and have also been linked to developmental neuroapoptosis. 
In humans, synaptogenesis extends from the third trimester of pregnancy through the first several years of life, and in some regions, like prefrontal cortex, may persist even longer. Exposure of the developing human nervous system to ethanol produces a syndrome known as FAS or in its milder form, fetal alcohol effects (FAEs). FAS is characterized by microcephaly, short stature, facial abnormalities, and learning defects. Rodents exposed to intoxicating levels of ethanol for several hours on a single day during synaptogenesis develop widespread neurodegeneration, which in some regions results in loss of more than half the neurons. Ethanol is a drug with complex effects, including the ability to inhibit NMDA receptors and enhance GABAA receptors. 
Major psychiatric disorders result from complex interactions of genes with environmental variables, and some studies indicate that individuals with fetal alcohol exposure exhibit significant psychopathology as they mature to adulthood, including increased prevalence of major depression and psychotic disorders. It is reasonable to be concerned that early exposure to drugs that alter neuronal activity during development may 

========473========

have major impact on the development of psychiatric syndromes in adulthood, and some epidemiological data support this notion beyond FAS. 
Optogenetics, Neuronal Excitability, and Psychiatric Neuroscience 
Psychiatric disorders involve dysfunction within and across neural networks underlying cognition, emotion, and motivation. The activity of neurons in these circuits underlies information processing and is at the base level of pathophysiology. While much progress is being made in understanding molecular mechanisms of neuronal excitability and synaptic function, considerable gaps exist in relating neuronal activity to the function of neural circuits. Over the past decade, driven in large part by the work of psychiatrist Karl Deisseroth and others, the field of optogenetics has evolved and is filling this gap by revolutionizing how psychiatrists think about and study the role of neural circuits in mental processing, behavior, and psychiatric disorders. This section discusses the principles of optogenetic methods as they pertain to neuronal function. These principles directly involve the points raised earlier in this chapter. 
Optogenetics combines optics and genetics, and takes advantage of the fact that certain microorganisms make proteins that use visible light to regulate the flow of ions across their membranes. These proteins link opsins (light-activated proteins) to the function of ion channels and membrane pumps. A leading example of this is channelrhodopsin (ChR), a nonselective cation channel that is activated by blue light. As is true of nonselective cation channels described elsewhere in this chapter, ChR provides a depolarizing stimulus to neurons when stimulated by the appropriate wavelength of light (~480 nm). By expressing ChR in specific brain regions or certain cell types within a brain region, it is possible to use light to precisely drive action potential firing of certain neurons but not others, and to study the influence of these neurons on circuit function and animal behavior. The selective expression of ChR in specific neurons is controlled by cell-specific genetic promoters. Thus, compared to electrical methods that stimulate all cells in a local brain region, optogenetic approaches provide a way to more precisely activate specific neuronal populations. 
Other techniques exploit the idea of introducing a foreign receptor into selected neurons to investigate the influence of particular cell types on behavior. These methods are sometimes classified as chemical genetics. In these techniques, a ligand-gated receptor or a GPCR, activated by an exogenous small molecule, is expressed in specific neurons. When the animal is administered the ligand for these designer receptors, the receptor is activated and behavioral effects are measured. Compared with optogenetics, which requires an implanted brain light source in addition to a genetically introduced ion channel, chemical genetics is somewhat less invasive. 

========474========

Advances in optogenetics and chemical genetics have greatly expanded the toolbox available to scientists. For instance, optogenetic variants are available that inhibit neurons (e.g., the chloride and proton pumps halorhodopsin and Archaerhodopsin), and that even more precisely regulate the timing of neuronal changes (e.g., step function opsins that require pulses of light to turn on and off as described above). Use of different opsins also allows expression of channels/pumps that are regulated by different wavelengths of light across the visible spectrum. Longer wavelengths of light (red-shifted variants) allow stimulation with lower light energy levels, producing less tissue heating and deeper light penetration. Optogenetics has promoted exploration of psychiatric models in mice, including studies of fear and anxiety, addiction and reward, depression and anhedonia, schizophrenia, and autism. How these findings translate to human illnesses remains to be determined and suffer the limitation that mouse models of psychiatric disorders are abstractions of clinical conditions. Importantly, optogenetic approaches can be expanded beyond mice to study brain function and behavior in higher-order species. Whether optogenetics or chemical genetics can be developed for the treatment of human psychiatric illnesses remains to be determined. 
Neural Excitability and Brain Stimulation Methods in Neuropsychiatry There is increasing interest in the use of brain stimulation (neuromodulation) methods to treat psychiatric and neurological disorders. These methods include ECT, vagus nerve stimulation (VNS), rTMS, DBS, and transcortical direct current stimulation (tDCS). The development of optimal stimulation parameters for these treatments requires knowledge about the effects of electrical stimulation on neuronal function. A major advance in ECT has been the recognition that electrical stimuli play a key role in determining therapeutic and adverse effects. Because the goal of an ECT session is to cause a generalized brain seizure while minimizing cognitive side effects, understanding the factors that determine seizure threshold and optimizing stimulus parameters becomes extremely important. To stimulate nerve cells, brief square-wave pulses of electrical current (0.1 to 2.0 milliseconds) are much more effective than more prolonged pulses or sine-wave stimuli. The rate of delivery of the current pulses is also important with lower frequencies (30 to 40 Hz) being more efficient than very high frequency trains (>100 Hz). These features reflect the fact that entrainment of neurons in a seizure is more likely using parameters that mimic neuronal firing patterns. Long current pulses (particularly sine waves) are inefficient because of the relatively slow onset and offset of the stimulus, and because much of the stimulus is delivered during the absolute and relative refractory periods when neurons are less excitable. Similarly, very high frequencies of stimulation also result in pulses being delivered during refractory periods. For reasons that are 

========475========

unclear, ultrabrief electrical pulses (~0.2-millisecond duration) are effective for unilateral but not bilateral ECT. The degree to which electrical doses exceed seizure threshold is also important. For bilateral ECT, electrical doses ~1.5 times threshold result in highly effective treatments that minimize cognitive impairment. For nondominant hemisphere (unilateral) ECT, these same electrical doses are ineffective and stimuli that are five to six times threshold are required for clinical improvement. The implication of these observations is that electrical dosing and stimulation parameters have a major impact on ECT outcomes, and both bilateral and unilateral ECT can be made effective or ineffective depending on the stimulus. 
More recent additions to the brain stimulation methods, particularly DBS, also require an understanding of the effects of electrical stimulation on neuronal activity, and raise issues about the potential role of homeostatic plasticity as a therapeutic mechanism. The parameters used for DBS typically consist of brief (0.06 milliseconds) pulses administered continuously at high frequency (>100 Hz). Modeling studies suggest that this stimulation has complex effects on network function with suppression of intrinsic firing at the neuronal cell bodies in the stimulated region but enhanced axonal responses and increased efferent output to downstream targets. Whether similar considerations are important for other brain stimulation methods such as rTMS and VNS is uncertain. A potential vista in the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders may involve the ability to regulate neural activity in focal regions of the brain using optogenetics or small molecules that are inactive until exposed to light of an appropriate wavelength. These methods offer the hope of targeting specific neurocircuits in specific disorders. 
SUMMARY 
The diversity of voltage-gated and ligand-gated ion channels is becoming better understood at structural, biophysical, and genetic levels. The properties of ion channels are being harnessed to yield unprecedented understanding of the roles of particular neural circuits in normal and abnormal behavior in animals. Electrical properties of neurons are also fundamental to modern brain stimulation methodologies. Although the electrical events underlying neuronal excitability are relatively stereotyped, the numerous ion channels contributing to neuronal excitability offer a great deal of flexibility in the control of cellular and network activity. Furthermore, the diversity of ion channels involved in electrical signaling provides complex and powerful mechanisms by which excitability can be modulated by neurotransmitters and drugs. Determining how alterations in ion channel function contribute to development, behavior, cognitive processing, and clinical syndromes continues to be a major goal in this field. 

========476========

REFERENCES 
Cannon SC. Pathomechanisms in channelopathies of skeletal muscle and brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2006;29:387–415. 
*Catterall WA. Sodium channels, inherited epilepsy, and antiepileptic drugs. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2014;4:317–338. 
Cattarall WA, Swanson TM. Structural basis for pharmacology of voltage-gated sodium and calcium channels. Mol Pharmacol. 2015;88:141–150. 
Crisp SJ, Kullmann DM, Vincent A. Autoimmune synaptopathies. Nature Rev Neurosci. 2016;17:103–116. 
Deco B, Ponce-Alvarez A, Hagmann P, Romani GL, Mantini D, Corbetta M. How local excitation- inhibition ratio impacts the whole brain dynamics. J Neuroscience. 2014;34:7886–7898. Delorme R, Ey E, Toro R, Leboyer M, Gillberg C, Bourgeron T. Progress toward treatments for synaptic defects in autism. Nat Med. 2013;19:685–694. 
Doyle DA. Structural changes during ion channel gating. Trends Neurosci. 2004;27:298–302. Herguedas B, Garcia-Nafria J, Cais O, Fernandez-Leiro R, Krieger J, Ho H, Greger IH. Structure and organization of heteromeric AMPA-type glutamate receptors. Science. 2016;352:549. *Hille B. Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates Inc.; 2001. *Hu H, Gan J, Jonas P. Fast-spiking, parvalbumin+ GABAergic interneurons: from cellular design to microcircuit function. Science. 2014;345:1255263. 
*Isaacson JS, Scanziani M. How inhibition shapes cortical activity. Neuron. 2011;72:231–243. Jan LY, Jan YN. Voltage-gated potassium channels and the diversity of electrical signaling. J Physiol. 2012;590:2591–2599. 
Karakas E, Furukawa H. Crystal structure of a heterotrimeric NMDA receptor ion channel. Science. 2014;344:992–997. 
Khosravani H, Zamponi GW. Voltage-gated calcium channels and idiopathic generalized epilepsies. Physiol Rev. 2006;86:941–966. 
Klassen T, Davis C, Goldman A, et al. Exome sequencing of ion channel genes reveals complex profiles confounding personal risk assessment in epilepsy. Cell. 2011;145:1036–1048. Kopfer DA, Song C, Gruene T, Sheldrick GM, Zachariae U, de Groot BL. Ion permeation in K+ channels occurs by direct Coulomb knock-on. Science. 2014;346:352–355. 
Lee CH, Lu W, Michel JC, et al. NMDA receptor structures reveal subunit arrangement and pore architecture. Nature. 2014;511:191–197. 
McCarroll SA, Hyman SE. Progress in the genetics of polygenic brain disorders: significant new challenges for neurobiology. Neuron. 2013;80:578–587. 
Miller PS, Aricescu AR. Crystal structure of a human GABAA receptor. Nature. 2014;512;270– 275. 
Ranada SS, Syeda R, Patapoutian A. Mechanically activated ion channels. Neuron. 2015;87:1162–1179. 
Shah MM. Cortical HCN channels: function, trafficking and plasticity. J Physiol. 2014;592;2711– 2719. 
*Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genetics Consortium. Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature. 2014;511:421–427. 

========477========

*Tye KM, Deisseroth K. Optogenetic investigation of neural circuits underlying brain disease in animal models. Nature Rev Neurosci. 2012;13:251–266. 
Waxman SG. Channel, neuronal and clinical function in sodium channelopathies: From genotype to phenotype. Nature Neurosci. 2007;10:405–409. 
Womelsdorf T, Valiante TK, Sahin NT, Miller KJ, Tiesinga P. Dynamic circuit motifs underlying rhythmic gain control, gating and integration. Nature Neurosci. 2014;17:1031–1039. Yizhar O, Fenno LE, Prigge M, et al. Neocortical excitation/inhibition balance in information processing and social dysfunction. Nature. 2011;477:171–178. 
Zhu S, Stein RA, Yoshioka C, Lee C-H, Goehring A, Mchaourab HS, Gouaux E. Mechanism of NMDA receptor inhibition and activation. Cell. 2016;165:704–714. 
Zorumski CF, Rubin EH. Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience: A Primer. New York: Oxford University Press; 2011. 
▲ 1.11 Genome, Transcriptome, and Proteome: The Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Underlying the Neurobiology of Mental Disorders 
MARJAN BOZINOSKI, M.S., AND CHRISTOPHER E. MASON, PH.D. 
This is an era in which the global study of the DNA, ribonucleic acid (RNA), and protein building blocks of cells has become feasible and increasingly routine. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of a million or more common genetic markers from large populations are now relatively inexpensive and conducted routinely. The same can be said for studies that sequence the exome, that is, the DNA of expressed genes, as well as the entire genome. The growing understanding of genome variation provided by the International HapMap Consortium and continued major advances in genotyping technology together have made it possible to conduct high- throughput, cost-effective GWAS in large numbers of individuals with detailed information on phenotypic traits and environmental exposures. The resulting data will be used to identify genetic variants potentially related to mental disorders, to assess the prevalence of these variants in large and diverse samples, and to examine possible modifiers of gene- disease relationships. Soon, the 1,000 genome project followed, organizing a comprehensive database of SNPs, copy number variations (CNVs), insertions and deletions (indels), as well as large structural rearrangements. ENCODE project (described later in this chapter) expanded these studies further into functional genomics. Functional genomics is already becoming routine in brain research and is being applied to the study of postmortem human brains from individuals with mental illness and to animal models of relevance to clinical neuroscience. 
These exciting molecular genetic approaches permit the study of biological information from a global perspective. This information is 

========478========

contained in the human genome, the three billion base sequence comprising the full complement of DNA in human cells. The genome of each individual is contained within every cell in the body that carries a nucleus and represents the raw material necessary to allow for normal development. This genetic material also plays a causal or contributory role in much of human disease, including mental illness. Genomics is the study of the full complement of genetic material of an organism. The ability to consider humans in this light is a fairly recent development, one that has been energized by the sequencing of the human genome and the subsequent large-scale efforts to identify and characterize human genetic variation and all functional and regulatory elements. The transcriptome is a term that can be applied to the sum total of RNAs transcribed from genes in an organism, a process often referred to as gene “expression.” Studies of gene expression vary depending on the experimental design, and may include only mature, polyadenylated mRNA or total RNA (mRNA plus noncoding RNA) in the cell. Studies of gene expression usually focus on (mRNA), the intermediate between genes and proteins. Global studies of gene expression compose the field of functional genomics and may use such tools as New Generation Sequencing (NGS), a methodology that relies on the power of massive parallel sequencing of short reads derived from genomic DNA or RNA. A simplified diagram of NGS workflow is shown in Figure 1.11–1. 
The proteome denotes the full panoply of proteins expressed in an organism and studied globally by proteomics. As the general understanding of these biological domains in humans and many other organisms has grown, so too has the appreciation of its complexity. The deeper we delve into its structure and function, the more we are pressed to reconsider basic concepts. For instance, the amount of genetic variation in apparently normal healthy people is underestimated. While it has long been appreciated that the sequence of the DNA varies slightly between individuals, it has recently learned that as much as 20 percent of the human genome can possess large-scale structural variation as well. Hundreds of thousands to millions of nucleotides of the genetic code may be missing, duplicated, or have multiple copies within a single individual without obvious adverse effects. These variations, which are referred to as copy number polymorphisms (CNPs) or copy number variants (CNVs), are just beginning to be catalogued and studied in depth. In addition, there are extremely large numbers of common differences between individuals on a single nucleotide level, known as SNPs. Understanding the importance of these many forms of genetic variation promises to revolutionize the current thinking about the role of genetic structural variation in normal development, shed light on the heritability and biology of traits associated with psychiatric disorders, and perhaps ultimately to reshape psychiatric diagnostic schema. 

========479========

The notion of “gene” is evolving as well. It was long thought that a single gene led to the production of single protein. However, by 1977, it was discovered learned that one gene may code for multiple versions of a protein that differed functionally. Recent data challenge the conventional definition of the boundaries of an individual gene, findings which will likely lead to a major reappraisal of genomic function and regulation. For example, most genes have multiple 3′ and 5′ termini and various splicing sites, and harbor various regulatory elements within their gene bodies. Also, elements called enhancers can control gene expression from long- range, and TFBSs can regulate the ability of genes to be activated, attenuated, or silenced. 
FIGURE 1.11–1. Overview of the NGS workflow. Tissue is being dissected and homogenized, and genomic DNA and/or RNA are extracted. In case of studying mature coding mRNAs, oligo-dT purification is performed. Next, DNA and/or RNA are fragmented into short pieces (~200 nt) and cDNA library is derived. Next, adaptors are ligated, which help anchor the cDNA to a hard surface, and sequencing by synthesis is performed. The final results are the sequences of the short fragments of DNA or RNA. 
In addition to forcing a reconsideration of fundamental genetic concepts, the sequencing of the entire human genome also set the stage for a far deeper understanding of how genetic variation alters the regulation of gene expression and how variation either in functional or regulatory domains of genes affects brain structure and function, and how this variation contributes to the risk for mental disorders. 
This chapter will review fundamental concepts, including the nature of 

========480========

DNA, chromosomes, RNA, proteins, and the concept of coding and noncoding genes. This chapter will then review what is currently known about the sequence characteristics of the human genome on a global scale and consider how this sequence varies between individuals and among populations. Subsequently, This chapter will consider how the genome is regulated and the manner in which the study of proteomics and systems biology promises to leverage these recent advances in functional genomics to enhance the general understanding of normal and pathological brain development and functioning. 
THE ORGANIZATION AND STRUCTURE OF THE HUMAN GENOME 
A genome is defined as the total complement of DNA replicated in a living organism. The sequencing of genomes of free-living organisms began in 1995 with bacteria and progressed to larger and more complicated organisms, such as yeast (1996), worms (1998), and fruit flies (2000). A critical milestone was reached in 2001 with the completion of the first draft of the human genome. Currently, there are thousands of genomes sequenced. In 2011, the Genome in a Bottle Consortium was established, with the goal of providing an entire technical infrastructure that will enable data from genome sequencing to be used in translational medicine. 
As these data became available, four curious patterns emerged: (1) The number of genes is lower than expected. Estimates prior to the completion of the draft human sequence ran as high as 160,000. As of the last issue of GENCODE annotation, the official annotation of the ENCODE project, there are 60,155 genes, with 19,881 of them being protein-coding genes. It is now evident that there are in total about 20,000 protein-coding genes in Homo sapiens; (2) Gene number is not a predictor of organismal complexity. For example, amoebas are simple, single-celled organisms, but are predicted to have many more genes than humans (Table 1.11–1); mice and humans have been found to have approximately the same number of protein coding regions; (3) Genome size is not a predictor of organismal complexity. An amoeba (Amoeba dubia) has the largest known genome (670 gigabases); humans and chimpanzee genomes are essentially of the same size, but they hold obvious and important differences with respect to the development of the cerebral cortex; and (4) A small percentage of eukaryotic genomes codes for proteins. Only 2 percent of the human genome encodes proteins. The vast majority is comprised of intronic and repetitive sequences, some of which are clearly functional, and much of which remains a mystery. Apart from protein-coding genes, there is a substantial number of actively transcribed genes that don’t code any proteins (noncoding RNAs, to be discussed below), sometimes called the “dark matter” of the genome. Some of this “dark matter” is known to be functional, although the functional significance of much of noncoding RNAs is yet to be resolved. 

========481========

Cumulatively, these observations pose a central question for psychiatry: if the genome of humans is not very distinctive from an evolutionary perspective, how has it produced the unique qualities of the human CNS? Recent developments have begun to shed light on this critical question. 
Table 1.11–1. 
Organism 
Amoeba 
Plant (Fern) Human 
Chimpanzee Mouse 
Honey bee 
Fruit fly 
Worm 
Fungus 
Bacterium 
Mycoplasma genitalium DNA virus 
RNA virus 
Viroid 
Number of Genes versus Genome Size across Different Organisms 
Genome Size (Base Pairs) 
Gene Count 
50,000 
37,500 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000 
15,000 
14,000 
19,000 
6,000 
3,000 
500 
450 
20 
1 
DNA and Chromosomes 
670,000,000,000 100,000,000,000 
3,000,000,000 
3,000,000,000 
2,500,000,000 
300,000,000 
130,000,000 
97,000,000 
13,000,000 
5,000,000 
580,000 
50,000 
10,000 
500 
Number of Chromosomes 
13 
90 
46 
48 
40 
32 
10 
12 
32 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
DNA is made of four nucleic acids, also known as nucleotides or bases, Adenosine (A), Cytosine (C), Guanine (G), and Thymine (T). In total, human genomic DNA is comprised of approximately 3 billion nucleotides, and this full complement is found in every cell in the body that contains a nucleus. Within the nucleus, the genome is organized into 46 strands of DNA that complex with multiple proteins to form chromosomes (23 inherited from mother and 23 inherited from father). In the nuclei of cells, the strands of DNA are combined with histone proteins that enable DNA to be wound tightly into histone-DNA complexes called nucleosomes, and then organized into a super structure called chromatin. 
From 
the first 
observations 
of chromosomes under the 
light 
microscope, chromatin has been divided into two types corresponding to the familiar light and dark banding patterns: euchromatin (lighter, less dense material) and heterochromatin (darker, more dense material). In one sense, chromatin acts simply as a spool around which DNA is wound, ensuring that the entire genome fits within the nucleus. This property enabled cells to remain small, a property that influenced the evolution of multicellular organisms. However, it also plays a key role in coordinating the function of the genome. The histone protein cores around which the DNA is organized may be altered by chemical reactions including 

========482========

acetylation, phosphorylation, and methylation. The addition or subtraction of these and other chemical modifiers are able to dictate the conformation of regions of DNA within the nucleus, a process which helps coordinate the regulation of gene expression. A field of study, epigenetics, has emerged to study the way that gene expression is altered by modifying chromatin or DNA methylation but not altering the DNA sequence (see section on Epigenetics of this chapter). Finally, the organizational structure of chromatin creates scaffolding that helps guide the movement of DNA necessary for chromosomal replication and during cellular division (mitosis). 
The darker staining of heterochromatin is due to the very tight packing of nucleosomes, making the DNA largely inaccessible to cellular machinery, whereas the light color of the euchromatin reflects a more open, unfolded, and usually active state. Euchromatic regions were found to be distinct in other ways as well: they hold many more genes and contain less repetitive sequences. However, heterochromatic regions of the genome can become active, and some heterochromatic regions are modified back and forth, becoming active only when needed. These processes will be discussed in more detail subsequently when epigenetic mechanisms are considered at the conclusion of this chapter. 
Genes, RNAs, and Proteins 
Gregory Mendel first discovered genes in 1866, when he identified hereditary units he called “factors” and elaborated the principles of their inheritance through his experiments with pea plants. However, he had no physical or mechanistic understanding of what constituted a gene. The first medical application of genes came in 1902, when Archibald Garrod found that alkaptonuria, a rare disorder characterized in part by the urine turning black when exposed to air, followed Mendel laws of inheritance. He identified that the transmission of this condition followed an autosomal recessive pattern. However, while it was clear that genes were passed from one generation to the next and carried disease liability, it was still unclear precisely how or in what substance. 
In 1910, Thomas Morgan demonstrated that genes were discrete units on chromosomes though his work with fruit flies, and he first proposed the idea of genetic linkage due to chromosomes exchanging material in a process called crossing over (Fig. 1.11–2). 
In 1941, experiments in bread molds (Neurospora crassa) by Edward Tatum and George Beadle showed further that certain enzymes were functionless if the genes were mutated. This led to the widely accepted notion that specific genes make specific proteins, commonly referred to as the “one gene, one enzyme” hypothesis. 
Despite these remarkable discoveries, the physical substrate for the transmission of genetic information was still a matter of debate. Early in 

========483========

the 20th century, proteins were favored as they were known to be comprised of 20 different amino acids. As DNA was the product of only of four different nucleotides, it was thought that the former was most likely to allow for the diversity required to make the complex instructions necessary for sustaining life. However, in 1944, genes were shown to be composed of DNA by Oswald Avery, through his demonstration that DNA could create a heritable transformation in bacteria, but proteins could not. 
Finally, in 1953, Watson and Crick published the chemical structure of DNA, showing that it was a double helix formed by two sugar-phosphate backbones supporting the four nucleotides. These, in turn, were recognized to form specific pairs between them, such that an “A” on one strand paired with “T” on the other and “C” on one paired with “G” on the other. 
Coding Genes 
The last several decades of progress has now led to an appreciation that there are, in a broad sense, two classes of genes: those that lead directly to the production of proteins (coding genes) and those that do not (noncoding genes). Coding genes are stretches of DNA that are transcribed by an enzyme (RNA polymerase) into a temporary mRNA, which is then translated into a protein (made of peptides), following what is known as the central dogma of molecular biology: DNA→RNA→Protein (Fig. 1.11–3). 
In the 1960s, it was discovered that coding DNA is “read” in three-letter segments called codons (Fig. 1.11–3), each of which becomes an amino acid in a peptide or protein. However, unlike simpler prokaryotic organisms, human coding genes are transcribed initially as sequences that require editing. Coding genes have segments that are read as codons (called exons), and also noncoding sequences that are transcribed but not translated into a protein. Noncoding sequences can be present in three areas of a gene: in front (upstream with respect to the sequence of transcription) of the gene, inside the gene, and behind (downstream) the gene. Those sequences upstream of the gene are called the 5′ UTR, while noncoding sequences flanked by exons are called introns. The noncoding region downstream of the coding interval is the 3′ UTR. Mature mRNA contains a polyadenylation signal (i.e., AAUAA) that directs transcriptional machinery to insert a long string of adenosines, known as a poly-A tail, at the 3′ terminus of the mRNA. A single gene may contain several polyadenylation signals in series in its 3′ UTR, but the mechanism of determining which one is going to be used has yet to be established. In turn, multiple polyadenylation signals allow for transcripts with variable 3′ UTR length to be produced from a single gene. Transcripts with longer 3′ UTRs are relatively prevalent in brain, giving rise to higher numbers of miRNA binding sites that enable fine tuning of RNA regulation. Additionally, longer 3′ UTRs are known to harbor protein-binding motifs 

========484========

that shuttle proteins to a specific subcellular location. The BDNF gene is known to possess a form with long 3′ UTR with a binding motif for BDNF that enables it to be transported to dendrites. Thus, the nascent mRNA transcript produced from a coding gene must be first processed to lead to the coherent set of instructions necessary to produce a protein product at the appropriate subcellular location. The removal of introns, through a process called gene splicing, is one critical step in determining a gene’s function, and it will be addressed in more detail when considering the function of each part of the genome. 
FIGURE 1.11–2. Crossing over. A schematic of genes positioned along chromosomes (circles) and exchanging information (crossing over) with a different series of genes (black circles suddenly with white circles) during meiosis. The farther apart genes are on a chromosome, the more often they cross over—a phenomenon known as recombination. 

========485========

FIGURE 1.11–3. Transcription and translation of a gene. During transcription, the thymine (T) in DNA is represented with a different nucleic acid (U, for Uracil), so that the codon can be understood by the cell’s machinery. Introns are removed from the final messenger RNA (mRNA), leaving a product that is ready to become a protein through translation of the codons. 

========486========

FIGURE 1.11–4. The genetic code. Genes are read in three-letter nucleotide segments (codons) and are then read by the cellular machinery to correspond to particular amino acids. 
Since gene transcripts are read in three-base codons, and DNA is made up of four nucleotides, there are 64 possible codons (4 × 4 × 4). In most organisms, mRNA that are translated into proteins possess a three-base sequence, called a start codon (AUG), delineating where the reading or translation of the codons should begin. Three stop codons (UGA, UAA, UAG) signal the last amino acid in the growing polypeptide chain. Start and stop codons are the punctuation needed for reading a gene, while the other 60 codons determine which amino acids are included in the peptide or protein. Since the cell uses only 20 different amino acids to make proteins, there exists some redundancy in the genetic code, such that different codons can encode for the same amino acid (Fig. 1.11–4). This redundancy in codon usage may have a specific function. There is a so-called codon usage bias, where translation favors some codons over others. Differences in codon translation efficiency are related to the concentration of tRNAs that correspond to those codons, thereby implying a that there is a complex interplay in between them. Such complex evolutionary changes may fine tune the translation process, especially in tissues with extremely broad repertoire of expressed genes, such as neurons. 
The processed RNAs are shuttled through the cell to organelles called ribosomes to be turned into a protein chain which then folds into increasingly complex levels of organization (Table 1.11–2). 
The total of all the proteins made by the genome is called the proteome. Many proteins serve as subunits for larger protein complexes (including the large enzyme that performs transcription, RNA polymerase II), and the study of many proteins at once is known as proteomics, a topic that will also be addressed in more detail later in this chapter. 
Noncoding Genes (or Noncoding RNAs) 
General statistics of the GENCODE annotation for the past 4 years shows a very interesting trend: the total number of annotated genes is rising; however, the number of protein-coding genes decreases, at the expense of rising number of noncoding RNAs, especially pseudogenes and long intergenic noncoding RNAs (LINCs), as shown in Table 1.11–3. 
Table 1.11–2. 
Increasing Levels of Protein Folding Complexity Name Definition 
Primary A chain of amino acid (peptides), making a polypeptide Secondary The amino acids are bound within a chain by hydrogen bonds Tertiary The polypeptide forms entire sheets and helices for a 3D structure 

========487========

Quaternary 
Multiple polypeptide chains bond together for a macromolecular structure 
Table 1.11–3. 
Distribution of Annotated Genes by Their Coding Capacity and Biotype 
for GENCODE 2010–2014 
Gencode Version 21 Gencode Version 10 Gencode Version 7 General Stats (June 2014) (July 2011) (December 2010) Total no. of genes 60,155 52,376 51,082 Protein-coding 19,881 20,007 20,687 
genes 
Long noncoding RNA 15,877 10,840 9,640 
genes 
Small noncoding 9,534 8,801 8,801 
RNA genes 
Pseudogenes 14,467 12,358 11,580 
While coding genes conform most closely to early notions of how hereditary information is stored and processed, over time it has become clear that these represent only about 2 percent of the genome. Moreover, an alternative set of instructions contained within the DNA governs transcription that is not followed by the production of a protein. Over 30,000 noncoding genes have so far been catalogued in the human genome. These are comprised of RNA (and consequently are also called noncoding RNAs, or ncRNAs). Table 1.11–4 lists several types of RNAs. Some are involved in regulating normal cellular processes of gene transcription and protein translation, whereas others have only recently been discovered and their functions are not as well understood. Moreover, some ncRNAs can function all by themselves, catalyzing reactions and acting autonomously in the cell. 
Some of the best characterized ncRNAs are called siRNAs. These are transcripts coded for in the DNA that are complementary (or antisense) to another transcribed sequence from the genome. Once a siRNA binds to the complementary mRNA sequence, the cell degrades the transcript, thus functionally silencing the gene that produced the mRNA without altering the DNA or mRNA sequence. Similarly, a different subset of noncoding genes, called micro-RNAs (miRNAs), are short (18–22 bp) sequences that bind most often to the 3′ UTR of a transcript and most commonly lead to a decrease in the level of the resulting protein. Both siRNAs and miRNAs operate posttranscriptionally to regulate gene expression. Thus, there are multiple extremely important ways along the process from DNA to protein in which gene expression may be altered is of major importance to scientists seeking to understand the function of the genome. This topic will be addressed in the second section of this chapter. The recognition that ncRNAs are widespread and play a key role in the regulation of gene 

========488========

expression strongly suggests that they may also confer risk for mental disorders and other complex diseases. Moreover, it was quickly realized that siRNAs could be useful to assess the consequences of loss of expression of a particular gene at the level of the cell or the model organism; as a result, siRNAs have quickly become an indispensable research tool. 
Two other important classes of ncRNAs are pseudogenes and LINCs. Pseudogenes are ubiquitous in the brain transcriptome, and encompass several types of transcripts, transcriptionally active genes that lost their coding potential—unitary pseudogenes (GULO-vitamin C–producing enzyme), duplicated genes that lost their coding potential, and reverse transcribed genes (processed pseudogenes). The reason their number keeps growing in each subsequent annotation is due to the fact that they share a substantial portion of their sequence with the functional genes, which makes them extremely hard to identify. Bioinformaticians have developed highly sophisticated algorithms to be able to distinguish pseudogenes from the functional genes. The “sponge” hypothesis suggests that pseudogenes may compete with functional genes for a limited pool of miRNAs. If so, then pseudogenes may influence overall gene regulation without possessing intrinsic function. 
LINCs also appear to influence neural function. Most LINCs alter transcription (H19, XIST, AIR, HOTAIR) in various ways (i.e., direct effect on transcription, changing the epigenetic signature). Others exert their function on the translational level (GAS5). 
While a significant amount of ncDNA is transcribed to functional ncRNAs (Table 1.11–4), it has not been clear how much of the genome was actively processed nor how much of this transcription might contribute directly to biological function. To answer this question, the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) launched a project in 2003 to identify all the functional elements in the genome, called ENCODE (the ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements). By the second phase of the ENCODE project, it appeared that 75 percent of the human genome was transcriptionally active. However, 70 percent of the genome showed extremely low expression levels, raising questions regarding functional significance. Also, 11 percent of the genome was associated with motifs in transcription factor-bound regions or high-resolution DNase footprints in one or more cell types. Promoter-associated histone modifications or enhancers marked ~20 percent of the genome, while as much as one-third of the genome was marked by modifications associated with transcriptional elongation. Taken together, it appears that the vast majority of the genome is either transcribed or harbors regulatory elements (Fig. 1.11–5). 
Table 1.11–4. 

========489========

Types of RNA 
Name Abbreviation Year Function 
Messenger (mRNA) 1956 Carries the transcribed message from the DNA 
Ribosomal (rRNA) 1958 Components of the protein-making machinery, the ribosome Transfer (tRNA) 1962 Function in translation to bring amino acids to ribosome Small nuclear (snRNA) 1977 Help the splicing of immature mRNAs to reach their final form Small nucleolar (snoRNA) 1986 Direct chemical modifications of rRNAs and other RNAs Micro- (miRNA) 1993 Single-stranded RNA that regulates gene expression Small interfering (siRNA) 1999 Small, double-stranded RNAs that interfere with transcription Piwi-acting (piRNA) 2006 Germ-line acting RNA that stops parasitic genetic elements 
FIGURE 1.11–5. Summary of the ENCODE project: The discovery and annotation of TARs was performed by sequencing RNA from a diverse range of cell lines, followed by comparative genomics, integrative bioinformatic methods, and human curation. Investigation of the regulatory elements involved DNA hypersensitivity assays, assays of DNA methylation, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) of proteins that interact with DNA, including modified histones and transcription factors, followed by sequencing (ChIP- Seq). 
These observations strained the ability to classify genetic material. While there is a clear distinction between coding and noncoding genes, a large amount of transcriptionally active DNA produces RNAs that do not fit into current functional categories. For clarity, the term ncRNA will be used to describe noncoding genes such as siRNAs and miRNAs whose general structure is well characterized. The additional transcribed material is referred to as transcripts of unknown function (TUFs) or transcriptionally active regions (TARs). 
TUFs and TARs may represent: (1) new protein-coding genes that were 

========490========

missed by previous experiments and gene-finding algorithms; (2) new noncoding genes; (3) novel antisense transcriptional units (siRNAs and miRNAs) that may regulate other genes; (4) alternative isoforms of known genes that include intronic regions in the final mRNA product; (5) mis- annotated genes that should be longer or shorter, divided into two genes, or merged into one larger gene; (6) biological artifacts representing aberrant transcription or accidental transcriptional read-through; or (7) experimental artifacts due to small amounts of genomic DNA contamination. 
Future experiments will be needed to clarify the role of these TARs, but some conclusions are already possible. For instance, the majority (93 percent) of the euchromatic genome is functional in some capacity (either transcribed or regulating another sequence). Also, gene regulation is symmetrical along the genome, with no bias for upstream or downstream placement of regulatory structures. This contrasts with previous notions that regions 5′ or upstream to the starting codon of a gene were most likely to modulate regulation of that transcript. Finally, surprisingly, many of these regulatory or active regions of the genome are not highly conserved across species. Taken together, these data show that any search for genes and genetic mechanisms contributing to brain development and mental disorders must extend far beyond the horizon of coding sequences. 
Repetitive DNA 
With the sequencing of the human genome and the recognition that only a small proportion is present in the form of coding DNA or noncoding RNAs, interest in the remainder of the genome has increased, and much of this material is present in the form of repetitive elements. 
The structural organization of the human genome is shown in Figure 1.11–6. Nearly one-third of the genome consists of repeated elements. Some repeated sections of the human genome serve structural purposes at the end or middle of chromosomes. However, many types of repeats are of unknown function including simple sequence repeats (SSRs) and segmental duplications (SegDups). SSRs are small sequences (2 to 6 bp) that are tandemly repeated in the genome. A short trinucleotide repeat (CAG) in the coding part of the HGG gene responsible for coding of the huntingtin protein is known to be the cause of Huntington disease, a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that is ultimately fatal. While healthy individuals have 10 to 35 repeats in the HGG gene, affected individuals can have as much as 120. The onset and severity of the disease correlates very strongly with the number of repeats. This is one of the few neuropsychiatric diseases with a clearly defined genetic etiology that can be diagnosed prior to the onset of symptoms with a simple test. Children of a parent with Huntington disease have a 50 percent risk of developing this disorder. Thus, the capacity to diagnose an illness in presymptomatic 

========491========

individuals raises important ethical issues related to the role of genetics in neuropsychiatric clinical practice. SegDups are sequences of 1,000 bp or greater that appear at least twice throughout the genome. Interestingly, some of these SegDups contain extra copies of entire genes. 
FIGURE 1.11–6. Structural organization of the human genome. Most of the human genome is repetitive DNA sequences and transposable elements (LINES, SINEs, LTRs, and viruses). Very little of the genome is coding sequence (exons) but there is great room for gene flexibility and change with many of the gene’s long intron sequences (introns). 
The most ubiquitous repeated genetic elements in the genome are transposable elements (TEs or transposons), which can jump from one place to another in the genome. This process may lead to new forms of genes that may be useful to humans, but it also poses a danger of disrupting essential genes. TEs are divided into several subgroups: Long interspersed elements (LINEs), short interspersed elements (SINEs), and the small 300 bp Alu element (considered a SINE). The Alu element is present in 75 percent of introns and accounts for 10 percent of the entire genome, whereas the 6,000 bp (6 kb) LINEs account for 20 percent of the human genome, and can be found in thousands of genes (in 5′ UTRs, exons, 3′ UTRs, and introns). Almost all genes in the human genome have at least one TE. 
Alu elements are both transposons and retrotransposons, which alter DNA through reverse transcription in the manner of retroviruses, such as the 7SL RNA-derived primate-specific repeat family. Their distribution throughout the evolution of primate lineage has resulted in as much as 1.1 million copies in the human genome. Insertions of the Alu elements occurred in a few major waves, deriving old AluJ subfamily (including AluJo and AluJb; about 81 million years ago), the middle-aged AluS subfamily (including AluS, AluSx, AluSg, AluSq, AluSp, AluSc, and AluSb; about 48 to 19 million years ago), and the young and still active AluY wave 

========492========

(including AluY, AluYa5, AluYa8, and AluYb8; starting about 6 million years ago and continuing to the present) (M7). Albeit ubiquitous in the genome, Alu repeats (as any other repeat or low-complexity sequence) are extremely hard to map accurately using the current short-read sequencing. This fact, along with the limited RNA sequence data derived from primates, explains the lack of proper mapping of these elements. The body of the Alu element is approximately 300 bp bases in length, formed from two diverged dimers, separated by a short A-rich region. Such structure makes enables them to fold perfectly into double-stranded structures, thereby being substrates for a process called RNA editing (discussed below). 
Novel findings show that Alu elements are actively transposing in neurons in culture as well as in neurons in vivo. These changes in the neuronal genomes might generate neurons with unique genetic, transcriptomic, and proteomic makeup, increasing the complexity of the brain. 
Since the human’s divergence from the common ancestor with the chimpanzee, approximately 98,000 viruses have invaded the human genome. These viruses, called endogenous retroviruses, total 8 percent of the human genome and are made up of long terminal repeats (LTRs) that reverse transcribe themselves from RNA to DNA, DNA transposons, and some viruses that lay dormant and can no longer replicate (about 4 percent of the human genome). Some of these sequences are essentially dead genomes that have incorporated into human DNA and are now replicated along with the genome, whereas others are still actively infecting humans by retrotransposition. 
The large volume of repetitive noncoding DNA present in the human genome total 98 percent of the human genome. These regions were thought to be nonfunctional, earning the misnomer, “junk” DNA. However, in light of the many functions ascribed to noncoding DNA, it is generally thought that the functions of this “dark matter” in the genome remain to be discovered. Even if a function for a specific sequence has not been identified, it may still be critical to the functioning of other genes, either nearby or surprisingly remote. Even if a sequence is a repetitive TE that is present in thousands of places in the genome, the location of a single TE may be needed for correct activity of that specific gene that now possesses the element. In a complete reversal from only a decade ago, every sequence of the genome is now considered putatively functional, opening the door for a better understanding of the genomic biology of psychiatry and revealing a much larger genome that requires critical examination. 
The Mitochondrial Genome 
All eukaryotes, including humans, possess two fully-functional living genomes, that is, the DNA particular to that species and the genomes of mitochondria (in animals) or chloroplasts (in plants). The theory of 

========493========

endosymbiosis suggests that in the early days of evolving life on Earth (1.5 to 2 billion years ago), multicellular life forms merged with respiratory bacteria, which were able to produce cellular energy in a more accessible form (ATP). This relationship proved to be mutually beneficial for both the protoeukaryotes and the respiratory bacteria, since the bacteria could evade prey and the protoeukaryotes had a new source of energy. This theory is supported by the fact that mitochondria have their own genome and separate replication cycles, and that the closest living relatives of mitochondria (rickettsia bacteria) are parasites of eukaryotic cells. 
Table 1.11–5. 
Human Diseases Arising from Mitochondrial-Encoded Genes Disorder Affected Gene(s) NARP (neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis, pigmentosa) ATPase6 
MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, stroke) tRNA (Leu), Cytochrome C MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy; ragged red fibers) tRNA (Lys), tRNA (Ser) LHON (Leber’s; hereditary; optic; neuropathy) MTND4 
FRDA (Friedreich ataxia) FRDA 
Leigh’s syndrome ATPase6, MTND5 
The human genome and the mitochondrial genome now have a completely intertwined coexistence. Nearly 300 genes from mitochondria are present on the 23 human chromosomes. These are referred to as nuclear DNA of mitochondrial origin (NUMTs), and they are produced by the nuclear genome to support the function of mitochondria. Further, 27 of these NUMTs do not appear in the chimpanzee or other genomes, and have therefore been incorporated into the human genome within the last 4 to 6 million years, the period since the divergence with the last common ancestor with chimpanzees. Most of them (23/27) are present within known or predicted human genes, indicating that the symbiosis between these two genomes is significantly gene-centered, perhaps ensuring stronger protection against transposable elements and/or protect mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from damage inflicted by reactive oxygen species (ROS). Finally, some neuromuscular diseases and metabolic defects arise from mutations or errors specific to mtDNA or NUMTs (Table 1.11–5), underscoring the importance of the mitochondrial genome in influencing risk to mental disorders. 
HUMAN GENETIC VARIATION 
The whole-genome sequencing of a reference human in 2001 set the stage for intensive studies of genetic variation between individuals and among populations. Generally, between any two unrelated persons, differences are present at approximately 1 in every 1,000 base pairs, that is, 0.1 percent of their genomes. It also appears that not everyone has two copies of every 

========494========

part of the genome. These larger regions of variability (>1 kb) occur in heterochromatic and euchromatic regions and are estimated to cover 5 to 20 percent of the total human genomic sequence. The prevalence of these variants has dramatically altered thinking about the total burden of variation within the human species. The search for disease susceptibility genes in psychiatry may be more precisely thought of as the hunt for that small proportion of genetic variation that is either causal or contributing to psychopathology. 
Sequence Variation 
DNA sequences of individuals vary in terms of the genetic code at the nucleotide level. Such changes may involve the substitution of one nucleotide for another, or in some cases, the insertion or deletion of one or a small number of bases, or indels. In addition, short repetitive sequences in the DNA may differ in terms of the number of nucleotides present in these regions, variations that are known as short tandem repeats (or STRs) and small sequence repeats (SSRs). 
There are varying thresholds for classifying a variant as common. Typically, if a sequence variation is found in less than 1 percent of the population, it is considered rare, though some authors use a threshold of 5 percent. Specific genetic variants found above this frequency in a given population are typically referred to as polymorphisms, but this term may also be applied to any change in the genome regardless of its frequency and regardless of whether or not it is deleterious to the function of the RNA or protein that it encodes or regulates. Similarly, any permanent change in the DNA nucleotide sequence can be called a mutation, although this term is most commonly applied to disease-related genetic variation. 
Common single base substitutions with a population frequency greater than 1 percent are often called SNPs. These have been intensively studied and proven critical to gene discovery efforts. SNPs are thought to have occurred spontaneously in human history, to have only happened at one point in that history, and to have distributed subsequently throughout a population over time. SNPs are generally stable from generation to generation and a very large number have accumulated in the genome as the human species has evolved. Currently, 30 million known SNPs have been identified. These individual SNPs, or the arrangement of SNPs on a single chromosome (called haplotypes), allow scientists to trace inheritance within families or to identify variation that may carry risks for disease within a population. In addition, the distribution of SNPs and haplotypes among various populations has provided critical insight into human evolution. For instance, this type of data, along with other genetic and archeological evidence, has provided strong evidence for the theory that humans originated from African hominids. 

========495========

Structural Variation 
While large microscopic variations including balanced and unbalanced translocations, large deletions or inversions, and extra chromosomes have been studied for decades, only recently has it become apparent that there is also a tremendous amount of submicroscopic structural variation in the genome. 
In the late 1990s, several labs developed tools to identify chromosomal aberrations that were below the resolution of the light microscope. Given the known relationship between chromosomal abnormalities and various human disorders, including cancer and mental retardation, it was anticipated that the ability to identify formerly unseen chromosomal anomalies would lead to the identification of additional disease susceptibility genes. The surprising result of these efforts was the identification of differences in the number of copies of chromosomal segments found among the control samples used to validate the technology. Given the clear evidence that these changes were widespread among individuals without any obvious phenotype, these changes became known as CNPs or CNVs. 
Subsequent studies have widely replicated these initial results, and the development of higher resolution technologies has demonstrated that deviations from the expected two copies of each genetic locus are common throughout the genome. These variants are not replacements or changes in sequence (like mutations or SNPs), but are more comparable to indels, where regions of the genome are missing a copy (heterozygous deletions), missing both copies (homozygous deletions), or have extra copies (amplifications). Healthy human beings possess from several dozen to several hundreds CNVs, and may carry as many as a thousand total CNVs. When the sum total of all the identified variants are considered (SNPs, CNVs, and larger DNA deletions and/or amplifications), as much of 20 percent of the genome has been shown to vary between individuals (Fig. 1.11–7). 

========496========

FIGURE 1.11–7. Detecting structural variation in the human genome. Using microarrays, which hold thousands of spots of DNA from the human genome, a comparison between amount of patient DNA and control DNA along the genome can be made. If a region of a chromosome is altered (upward shift in intensity, in red along the chromosome), it is then defined as a CNV. 
Gene (and large genomic segments) duplications have resulted in many evolutionary changes during the evolution of hominid lineage. Trichromatic vision was developed in the primate lineage around 40 million years ago as a result of gene duplication. Such rearrangement was facilitated by the Alu repeats, which flank the opsin genes, allowing the duplication to occur. The genes coding for cytochrome P450 enzymes frequently contain CNVs in humans. They are key enzymes in drug metabolism, and as such, extremely important in the novel field of pharmacogenomics (discussed below). 
The discovery of CNVs has had an enormous impact. Approximately 10 percent of the genes in the human genome, including genes influencing development, overlap common CNVs, suggesting that the human genome is able to tolerate haploinsufficiency (the loss of one of two haploid copies) to a far greater extent than previously anticipated. Several mechanisms lead to CNV formation. Some CNVs appear to have developed once in human history with subsequent distribution among populations. Other CNVs appear to be more dynamic. In this case, a region of the genome may be primed to lead to CNVs, but this process may occur essentially randomly among different individuals and lead to multiple different CNVs in a single chromosomal region. 
The relationship between CNVs and human disease is a topic of intense study. It is now clear that the relationship between genotype and phenotype with regard to structural variation is quite varied. Previously, if a deletion was identified in a patient being evaluated for mental retardation, it was presumed that the deletion was the likely cause of the clinical problem. Presently, the identification of a loss of a gene in such a patient, even one known to be involved in brain development, is no longer prima face evidence of causality. At present, it is generally presumed that: (1) some CNVs have no phenotypic consequences; (2) as with other forms of variation, some common CNVs will be found to contribute incrementally to complex, multigenic disease; and (3) some copy number changes, particularly those that are rare and or de novo (newly created in a single person), may carry large risks for some disorders. Given that the characterization of these types of variation in the human genome is in the early stages, distinguishing among these alternatives in a given patient or population remains a formidable challenge. 
Common versus Rare Genetic Variation 

========497========

Irrespective of whether a genetic variant is sequence-based or structural, once it is introduced into the human genome, one expects that it will be subject to natural selection, that is, changes that do not alter reproductive fitness may be readily passed from generation to generation and, over time, have the potential to become common. Alternatively, changes that result in reduced fitness are likely to be subject to purifying selection, leading the frequency of that variant to decline over time in the population. 
The impact on fitness is only one of several forces that influence the frequencies of genetic variants. For instance, a new mutation is, by definition, rare until it has had time to disseminate into a population and be subject to selective pressures. Moreover, the history of ethnic populations and migration patterns can dramatically influence the dynamics of genetic variants over time. 
One would presume that rare variants contribute to disorders that are lethal early in development and those that reduce fertility or otherwise lead to decreased reproductive fitness. One would conversely presume that common genetic variants contribute to disorders that appear later in life or for which there is not a negative impact on fitness. Common variants are also presumed to be implicated in conditions (e.g., sickle cell trait) where a positive effect (malaria resistance in this case) of a given genetic variation might counterbalance negative consequences. The competing impacts of positive and negative effects of a gene variant is called balancing selection. 
The field of human genetics has a record of tremendous accomplishment in those disorders in which a single rare genetic change causes or dramatically increases the risk for a disease or syndrome. However, the task of clarifying disorders in which multiple gene variants contribute to the manifestation of a disease has remained a daunting challenge. Two alternative, but not mutually exclusive, paradigms have emerged to account for the genetics of common complex disease: a common variant: common disease model and a rare variant: common disease alternative. 
The former has been largely favored in mental disorder; for example, it is widely held that schizophrenia, major depression, bipolar disorder, and autism result from the combined effect of multiple common genetic variants, each with modest effect and interacting with environmental factors to exceed a biological threshold. For these and other complex disorders, both modeling and early experimental evidence have essentially ruled out the contribution of a single gene of major effect, assuming that there is a single phenotype (with relatively little variation) for a particular illness. Extended family members can be found to show signs of subtle, subclinical phenotypes (so-called endophenotypes) that appear to be near but not beyond a critical liability threshold. As most of the variation within a population is carried in common variants, it is thought that 

========498========

common disorders will likely reflect this underlying genetic architecture. 
An alternative model posits that many individually rare variants with relatively large effects contribute alone or in combination to the risk for common disorders. This hypothesis seems intuitive for disorders with early onset and those that alter reproductive fitness. In the absence of balancing selection, one would expect that alleles with large effects, even if these are contributory and not causal, would be likely to be rare. In addition, one would expect a significant burden of rare mutations for disorders in which so-called sporadic or de novo variation played an important role. Indeed, recent studies show that de novo mutations (mostly de novo missense and de novo likely gene-disrupting mutations) in children affected by autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) may account for more than 10 percent of the diagnosed cases. 
These two possibilities are not mutually exclusive. As more research is completed, it is likely that both common and rare variants will be found to contribute to the variable manifestation for many common mental disorders. However, the distinction is of tremendous importance with respect to current genetic studies because the methodologies employed to show a causal or contributory role for genes differ tremendously in terms of their ability to detect the contribution of rare versus common genetic variation. In addition, diseases with complex and extremely variable phenotypes, such as schizophrenia or ASDs, may be caused by various combinations of rare and common variations, which would, at least in part, explain the large spectra of pathologies seen in aforementioned conditions. This issue will be addressed in the Population Genetics and Genetic Epidemiology chapter. 
THE FUNCTION OF THE GENOME 
Now that the sequence of the human genome has been elaborated, research now focuses on how its 3 billion nucleotides work in a coordinated fashion. Given that the human genome appears largely unremarkable compared to other species in terms of size, gene number, or percentage of the genome devoted to protein coding, one must presume that the capabilities of the human brain must be powerfully influenced by variation in a relatively limited number of genes or influenced by factors other than raw DNA sequence. The characterization of brain-specific functional components of the genome, and the consequences of genetic variation in these elements, will undoubtedly become a prime concern for psychiatric genetics in the coming era. More broadly, such an understanding will identify those unique molecular changes that define Homo sapiens as a species. 
As recently as the early 1970s, the importance of gene regulation for shaping the development of the human brain remained in question. Several hypotheses were entertained regarding the origin of the differences between humans and other closely related species. It was thought that 

========499========

speciation might be the result of small-scale sequence changes (DNA or protein sequence chances), regulatory changes (from controller genes or other similar elements), or large-scale sequence change (gene and genome duplication). In 1975, Mary-Claire King and Allan Wilson published a paper in which they sequenced and compared 44 human and chimpanzee genes. To the surprise of many, the vast majority of these sequences were found to be nearly identical among chimp and human and virtually all of the small- scale changes identified were synonymous. Moreover, the gene and genomic organization of the transcripts was essentially unchanged between the two species. These data demonstrated for the first time that neither coding sequence nor genomic organization was likely to account for the differences between the two species. 
King and Wilson’s work supported the alternative conclusion, that is, the sequence surrounding genes that regulated gene expression accounted for key evolutionary changes that include dramatic differences in cortical architecture. This work also implied that sequencing of the human genome and that of closely-related species would not be sufficient for understanding key differences in their biology. These conclusions largely have been borne out: it is clear that in order to understand brain function, the question of whether a gene sequence is present is often not as important as determining when and how the transcript is active in that organism. In cases of highly divergent neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism, it has been shown that there are distinctive spatiotemporal expression patterns of the ASD-associated genes in early developmental stages of the brain. Aberrant spatiotemporal expression of these genes could easily contribute toward developmental impairments, resulting in autism. 
Yet another confirmation of King and Wilson’s work came up recently with obtaining the genomes of the Old World Apes. Namely, several genomic regions that underwent rapid evolution in humans were identified —human accelerated regions (HARs). While HAR1 is a gene expressed during development of the neocortex, and HAR2 (also known as HACNS1) is a human-specific developmental enhancer, another 721 HARs were identified comparing conservation scores of the sequences. Surprisingly, 92 percent of them are noncoding genes, emphasizing the likely importance of regulatory sequences in recent human genome evolution. 
REGULATION OF TRANSCRIPTION AND THE TRANSCRIPTOME 
Perhaps the largest contribution to the complexity of eukaryotes comes from RNA splicing, the process by which the exons of a gene can be combined in multiple ways (Fig. 1.11–8). 
The discovery that genes were transcribed as both exons and introns came from studying the adenovirus gene hexon in 1977. The implications of this discovery for human evolution were quickly recognized: a single region 

========500========

of DNA could lead to a variety of transcripts and multiple versions of a protein. These in turn could become targets of evolutionary selection that might generate new function without having to sacrifice the utility of the original transcript. Thus, the “universe” of the transcriptome suddenly became much larger. 
FIGURE 1.11–8. Alternative splicing in eukaryotic genes. Different variations of certain multiexon genes can be generated by the cell, depending on environmental conditions or developmental stage. These different splice variants will then create a slightly modified version of the gene’s protein. 
During RNA splicing, exons can either be retained in the mature message or targeted for removal in different combinations to create a diverse array of mRNAs from a single pre-mRNA, a process referred to as alternative RNA splicing. By 1994, estimates of the number of human genes exhibiting alternative splicing ranged from 1 to 5 percent. However, these estimates were known to be imprecise due to the sparse availability of sequence data. Interest in resolving this issue led to a portion of the HGP being devoted to studying the relationship between gene structure and gene expression, and two methods were utilized: complementary DNAs (cDNAs) and expressed sequence tags (ESTs). Both methods depend on the mRNA being processed first, which removes all the introns and then adds a long polyadenosine (poly-A) tail to the initial transcript. The presence of these poly-A tails provides a means for transcripts to be bound and isolated in the laboratory by running the total extracted RNA through columns packed with complementary poly-T sequences. Once isolated, the single-stranded mRNAs serve as a template in a reaction to create the complementary sequence, using an enzyme called reverse transcriptase. This creates the cDNAs, which can then be sequenced. ESTs are small fragments of cDNAs, and they are slightly different because they use cloning techniques to digest the cDNA and merge the sequence with a bacterial fragment in order to discern the sequence. Once created and analyzed, these EST and cDNA libraries confirmed a massive amount of alternative splicing in the genome and showed that within genes some exons are always used (constitutively spliced), while others are very rare 

========501========

and specific to a certain time or place in the body (alternatively spliced). 
As these sequence libraries were being created, other technologies simultaneously emerged to allow researchers a clearer view of gene expression and splicing. In 1995, Pat Brown and colleagues first measured expression for 45 genes in parallel in the plant Arabidopsis by creating a microarray. They placed complementary sequences to the 45 genes in small spots on a glass microscope slide and then isolated mRNAs from two different Arabidopsis samples. The relative expression of each of the 45 genes could be determined between the two samples based on the fluorescence intensity determined at each spot on the slide. 
Since this time, a series of technical and methodological developments have led to an astonishingly rapid increase in the density and specificity of the probes (spots) that may be placed on microarrays. Current technologies allow for millions of sequences to be arrayed on a single slide, providing the basis for comprehensive and global studies of gene expression within and among organisms. With hundreds of thousands of cDNAs and ESTs isolated, the current estimate is that at least 80 percent of human genes undergo alternative splicing. 
While the size and gene number found in an organism do not generally correlate with biological sophistication of an organism, such is not the case for alternative splicing. At the most fundamental level, this distinction is made clear by the contrast between prokaryotes (which have no alternative splicing) and eukaryotes (which do). There is also some evidence that within higher organisms, increases in splicing rates correspond to greater complexity. For instance, in yeast, most genes (~96 percent) have no introns, and very few splicing events have been discovered. Moreover, recent evidence shows that invertebrates have fewer genes undergoing alternative splicing (50 to 60 percent in the fruit fly) than do vertebrates (80 percent in human). 
While the total amount of alternative splicing in the human genome remains a question, it is already clear that brain shows the largest amount of any tissue in the human body. This observation suggests that alternative splicing and its regulation may be quite important for understanding what makes the human brain so different from other closely related species, and in understanding the neurobiology of mental disorders. 
Indeed, the process of alternative splicing bestows an opportunity for genes to undergo accelerated evolutionary change. Most genes are under strong negative selection pressure, meaning that it is difficult for them to change, especially if they are critical to early development of an organism. Alternative splicing leading to the formation of a gene’s less common products can be an evolutionary shortcut that relaxes this negative selection pressure. Since enough of the major (or more common) form is still present, the new, minor splice form would not be subject to the same degree of negative selection, and may even create a “neutral space” for the 

========502========

novel gene product to acquire a new function for the organism. 
Ample evidence of this process can be found within the DNA sequence. The exonic constituents of the major versus minor forms of a given gene are largely conserved between the mouse and human genomes. The major- use exons typically show higher degrees of sequence conservation than minor-use exons, suggesting stronger negative selection on the former. Cross-species comparisons demonstrate that minor-use exons are a more recent addition in evolutionary time, supporting the hypothesis that the basic biological functions of a gene can be augmented through the addition of new splice variants. There is strong evidence that when a minor-use exon subserves a new important function, its level of conservation quickly approaches that of more ancient exons. These phenomena take place even if the new splice variant is highly restricted temporally or spatially, and this is amply demonstrated in human brain. 
It has often been the case that researchers have focused on changes that affect the most highly conserved regions of a gene or the most highly conserved amino acids in a protein sequence, based on the notion that these underpin the most vital functions of the transcript. Recent cross- species comparisons and the enhanced knowledge of splice variation suggests that it is also possible that changes in less-conserved sequence or those that alter only minor splice variants that are spatially or temporally restricted could be quite relevant. 
An appreciation of the importance of splice variations points to the critical nature of its regulation. As with many other aspects of the genome, the mechanisms of the process are incompletely understood. It has long been appreciated that there are canonical splice sites that define the boundaries of introns: the 5′ splice site typically has the sequence GT and 3′ site most often has the sequence AG. However, these are not absolute, as they are absent in approximately 2 percent of known introns. It has been appreciated that regulation of gene splicing is also influenced by sequences nearby or within the gene. These include exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) and exonic splicing silencers (ESSs), which are specific sequences contained within exons that regulate splicing proliferation or attenuation. Changes in these sequences can have a profound impact on gene function without altering the amino acid composition of a protein. Synonymous sequence mutations, that is, those that alter the nucleotide sequence but do not change the amino acid sequence, involving these motifs have been shown in some cases to lead to serious developmental disorders. 
In addition to the accumulating knowledge on gene splicing, several other aspects of regulating the transcriptome have been well characterized. Individual genes are regulated by transcription factors, which determine the timing and degree of a gene’s activity. Transcription factors bind to specific sequences upstream of genes called TFBSs or response elements 

========503========

(REs) (Fig. 1.11–9). Most transcription factors consist of a DNA-binding domain which confers some target specificity and an activation domain which confers its regulatory function. 
FIGURE 1.11–9. Gene regulation by transcription factors. Once a transcription factor is activated in its activation domain, usually by phosphorylation (the P sites on the TF), the DNA-binding domain is then activated and finds the binding site in front of the appropriate gene (TFBS). Once bound, the gene is then activated. 
RNA Editing 
Another way of regulating and diversifying the transcriptome is RNA editing. RNA editing is one of the most unusual posttranscriptional RNA modifications, since it can modify the information content of an organism without changing the underlying DNA in the genome. It is mediated by the ADAR type of enzymes, deaminating adenosine (A), and turning it into inosine (I), which is then recognized as guanosine (G) by both the spliceosome and the ribosome (Fig. 1.11–10). This type of transcriptome diversification contributed to evolutionary changes in many cases instead of gene duplication/mutation or alternative splicing, possibly due to its efficiency and low energy consumption. RNA editing may produce changes in the coding sequence, miRNA binding sites, and may create novel splicing sites. Until recently, only a small number of edited human genes were discovered, and most of them have important roles in the CNS. Brain shows the most versatile repertoire of RNA editing events, including AMPA, HTR2C receptors, sodium channels, and calcium channels. Humans have 

========504========

the highest amount of A to I editing, as compared to rodents, rhesus macaque, and chimp, which may contribute to human traits. 
RNA editing occurs almost exclusively on RNAs that form double- stranded secondary structures (dsRNA). Alu elements, due to their specific sequence, are perfect target for RNA editing. Due to the fact that so many genes involved in brain functions undergo editing (calcium, sodium, potassium channels; GABA, serotonin, glutamate receptors), it is thought that RNA editing is a “fine tuner” of the brain transcriptome. 
One of the best known eukaryotic regulatory elements is the TATA box, so named because the sequence TATA is present upstream of a gene. This motif binds a protein complex that allows for the initiation of transcription. The core promoter of individual genes need not contain all elements. Many promoters lack a TATA box and use instead the functionally analogous initiator element (INR). These sequences are related to the number of protein-coding genes in the genome. Determining the number of coding genes in an organism is simply a matter of counting the number of TATA boxes and INRs in promoters that are nearby coding regions. Sequences like the TATA box, which are immediately upstream of a gene, are called cis-regulatory (meaning “on the same side”), due to their presence nearby the gene and on the same strand of DNA. Regulatory elements, TFBSs, or gene products that act on a gene from the other strand of DNA or from a distant region of the genome are called trans-regulatory elements. 
FIGURE 1.11–10. Representation of RNA editing in a coding region of a gene. ADAR- mediated RNA editing. Double-stranded secondary structure of the RNA (black line) enables ADAR binding (light gray) and deamination of the adenosine in the exon. Deamination derives inosine, which then acts like guanosine in each interaction that requires Watson- Crick base pairing. Nascent CAG codon showed on the scheme, has been changed to CI(G)G. 

========505========

After the human genome was sequenced, this simple dichotomy of regulation (cis- and trans) has become more complicated. The most well- understood promoter elements (TATA box and INR) are only present in the promoter regions of 54 percent of human genes, where promoters are defined within 100 bp in either direction of the transcriptional start site (TSS). This suggests that unknown promoter sequences exist to regulate the expression and function of these genes, or much of gene regulation occurs in trans-regulatory elements. A great deal of bioinformatics research is now focused on this very question. 
Over 10 other core promoter elements are now predicted, but there is no longer an expectation that these elements will be universally present in all or even most genes. Rather, genes are activated in large simultaneous groups, or come in multiple waves of activation, and these coexpressed genes can have a specific set of regulatory elements and modules that restrict expression to a certain time or place. Once a large set of coexpressed genes is found, an examination of the upstream regions of those genes can be performed to ascertain the sequences of the regulatory elements. 
For a set of coexpressed genes, it is not typical to identify precisely the same regulatory sequence upstream of all of these transcripts. Due to the flexibility in the TF’s DNA binding domain, there is often some sequence variability that is tolerated in gene regulation. Studies of many TFBSs have demonstrated that certain nucleotides in the binding site are critical, while others may vary. Aligning these sites across many genes results in the identification of a consensus sequence or consensus motif for a TFBS (Fig. 1.11–11). 
Hundreds of transcription factors have now been studied with a technique called ChIP (Chromatin Immuno-Precipitation). The dynamic process of TF binding to regulatory elements is frozen in a moment in time by fixing bound TFs to their cognate regulatory site via a chemical process known as crosslinking. Genomic DNA, some of which is now bound by TFs, is then fragmented in a manner that preserves this crosslinking. Using antibodies specific to the known TFs, the bound genomic sequences can be identified, separated from the rest of the genome (the unbound fragments), and then characterized. These bound fragments can sequenced directly to identify where precisely a specific TF is functioning, or may be labeled with different dyes and studied on microarray. This latter method has become known as ChIP-chip (chromatin immunoprecipitation on a chip). 
These experiments identified a large amount of regulatory complexity in the human genome. The position of the TSS, where the beginning of transcription occurs for a gene, can sometimes be found hundreds of thousands of bases (>100 kb) away from the first exon. Also, many of these regulatory elements, TSSs, and TFBSs for genes are not found beside their respective gene but within introns or within different genes altogether. 

========506========

Sometimes these regulatory elements allow for genes to behave as discrete elements; however, at times, these regulatory motifs allow for a group of genes to merge together. There have been observations of trans-splicing, whereby exons from one gene can combine with exons from a completely different gene, creating chimeric mRNAs and chimera proteins that contain some or all of the elements from the two independent proteins. 
Important points in understanding gene regulation include the following: any regulatory element in the genome should not be presumed to be regulating the gene to which it is adjacent; multiple genes may be activated in concert by a single, distant regulatory element; and a single gene is not always a single gene, and can (if needed) merge with some or all of the parts of another gene, even at relative great distances. 
Epigenetics 
One additional realm of genetic regulation rests outside of genomic sequence in the epigenome. Epigenetic regulation is any heritable change in the genome that does not change the nucleotide sequence. These changes can occur by either a chemical modification to the DNA known as methylation or by chemical changes to the protein complexes of histones. Histone modifications are far more numerous, with phosphorylation, acetylation, methylation, and ubiquitination modulating the activity of a gene or group of genes by altering DNA-protein complex conformation. This in turn has an impact on DNA availability to transcription factors and the recruitment of other molecules that inhibit or enhance gene expression. 
FIGURE 1.11–11. Building a consensus sequence for a transcription factor binding site (TFBS). For any TFBS upstream of many genes, there are often several different functional motifs (Part no. 1, no. 2, and no. 3) that allow for binding of that specific TF. When merged, 

========507========

these three 10 bp sequences create a consensus motif that degenerates across all nucleotides except for position 8, which is always a cytosine (C). 
Table 1.11–6. 
Effects on Gene Expression of Mono-, Di-, Trimethylation, as well as 
Acetylation of Lysine for the Most Prominent Histone Markers 
Histone Modification Type 
Histone Type Monomethylation Dimethylation Trimethylation Acetylation H3K4 Activation Activation 
H3K9 Activation Repression Repression Activation H3K14 Activation H3K27 Activation Repression Repression Activation H3K79 Activation Activation Activation 
H3K36 Activation 
H4K20 Activation 
H2BK5 Activation Repression 
Epigenetic marks on DNA consist of methylation of cytosine, by specific methyltransferases, thereby deriving 5-methyl Cytosine (5 mC). 5 mC presence is predominant at regions of the genome that contain neighboring CG tandems—CpG sites. Cytosine methylation of CpG sites located at the gene promoters is a hallmark of transcriptionally silenced genes. DNA methylation is a reversible process, and it is thought that the oxidative product of 5 mC, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5 hmC) is an intermediate in conversion of 5 mC back into cytosine. Presence of 5hmC in germ cells is in favor of this model, as demethylation (resetting of the epigenetic code) is needed for production of gametes. Additionally, 5hmC shows high concentrations in CNS, with novel data suggesting roles of 5hmC in regulating splicing and gene expression in the brain. 
Important histone modifications and their effect on the gene expression are presented in Table 1.11–6. 
Probably the most reliable signs of gene repression is the presence of H3K27Me3 at gene promoters as well as H3K9Me2/3, which is a strong mark for the presence of heterochromatin at the specific location. In contrast, H3K4Me3 presence at the promoters is a sign of open, actively transcribed chromatin regions, while H3K36Me3 marks during the length of the gene body is also an indication of an actively transcribed region. 
Epigenetic programming allows for tissue-specific regulation of gene function and structural and functional specialization throughout the body. Epigenetics also clearly helps explain differences between identical twins who share the same DNA sequence. This nonsequence-based, heritable change can also lead to parent-specific effects during fertilization, known as imprinting. Each person, when making eggs or sperm, imprints the epigenetic characteristics of his or her own sex, since they must reprogram 

========508========

the epigenetic signature that was given by their own parents. Prader–Willi and Angelman syndromes are examples of diseases attributable to abnormal epigenetic imprinting. 
Epigenetic programming not only regulates single genes but also can alter the behavior of entire chromosomes. X-chromosome inactivation is a normal process that occurs in every human female, in which one X chromosome is genetically silenced in every cell. This allows for dosage compensation, in which the amount of expression of any gene mapped to the X chromosome is essentially the same for males and females (even though males carry only a single X). The choice of which chromosome is active (Xa) and inactive (Xi) within a given cell is typically a random process. However, in some cases a particular chromosome is more likely to be inactivated, contributing to aspects of Rett syndrome and other X-linked disorders. 
Parent of origin effects, defined as transmission of a risk for disease based on whether an autosome has been transmitted by the mother or father, has been hypothesized to play a role in several common mental disorders. The strongest evidence that this may be the case is the observation that duplications of chromosome 15q inherited from the mother, but not the father, accounts for a small but significant proportion of cases of autism. 
Epitranscriptome 
Another layer of complexity arises from modifications to the bases in RNA —the epitranscriptome. The current database list 112 forms of RNA modification. One type, methyl-6-Adenosine (m6A), is found in all of the kingdoms of organisms. m6A is enriched within 3′ UTRs, and long exons in both mice and humans. Sequences enriched with m6A are evolutionary conserved. Preliminary analysis showed that m6A may hinder RNA editing. Also, as m6A can be demethylated back into adenosine, it may constitute a mechanism for regulating RNA editing. m6A is implicated in the modulation of the circadian rhythm, perhaps by influencing the trafficking of circadian cycle regulatory genes through the nuclear envelope. Additionally, it may play a role in regulation of translational dynamics for transcripts enriched with m6A. These functional relationships suggest that posttranscriptional modifications of RNA may modify transcript’s properties and function, generating the so-called epitranscriptome. 
PROTEIN REGULATION AND THE PROTEOME 
Just as gene expression is regulated at multiple steps, so too can the protein products specified by coding genes (Table 1.11–7). Over 20 known modifications may occur to proteins. These modifications include chemical modification of specific amino acids, exchanging one amino acid for 

========509========

another, attaching other biochemical functional groups, attaching larger molecules (e.g., lipids or carbohydrates), or making structural changes to a protein. Even after a protein is fully formed and biochemically active, it can still be selectively targeted for degradation. 
These types of protein modifications play an important role in neurotransmission, since most neurotransmitters are shuttled across synaptic membranes and clefts by proteins that have been specially created to accomplish this task. For example, the protein that transports dopamine across synaptic membranes, the DAT, undergoes a range of posttranslational changes that are specific to its needed function in each cell. 
Table 1.11–7. 
Regulatory Mechanisms across the Genome, Transcriptome, and 
Proteome 
Name 
1. Epigenetic Allelic exclusion (imprinting one allele of a gene, so only the other is 
expressed) X-chromosome inactivation 
Chromatin remodeling and chemical alteration (methyl, acetyl, 
phosphate) 
Short-range cell–cell signaling 
2. Pretranscriptional Binding of tissue-specific transcription factors to activation sites in 
single genes 
Binding of a competing, inhibitory factor on the binding site 
Hormones binding to response elements in inducible genes 
Use of different transcription start sites, stop sites, and promoters in a 
gene 
3. Posttranscriptional Alternative splicing within the same gene 
Tissue-specific RNA editing 
Translational control mechanisms 
Interference and degradation by small RNAs (siRNA) 
Trans-splicing between different genes 
4. Posttranslational Proteolytic cleavage (removal of the start codon methionine) 
Protein merging into a larger protein complex 
Glycosylation 
Targeted for degradation (ubiquitination) 
Chemical alteration of the protein (methyl, acyl, phosphate, or sulfate 
groups) 
Addition of heavy metals 
To measure and understand these changes for each protein, a new discipline, proteomics, has emerged that examines each individual protein’s various chemical modifications and how those proteins interact with each other to create larger cellular complexes and machinery. Components of the proteome have been the focus for intensive study, for example, all the active and interacting proteins in a synapse are dubbed the synapse proteome and those in the brain are termed the brain 

========510========

proteome. All of these protein characterizations and interactions require extensive experimental support, large datasets, and overlapping experimental methods. 
Mass spectrometry is useful for rapid cataloging of all proteins present within a sample, such as the ~1,000 proteins in the synapse proteome (~1,000 proteins). High-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled with mass spectrometry has the capabilities of resolving the full proteome of the brain. Two-dimensional (2D) electrophoresis is used to study protein interactions. In this approach, proteins are pushed across each other’s path in a gel, with a change in the migration pattern suggesting a direct interaction. Yeast two-hybrid experiments are another approach to characterizing protein binding partners. In this case, two proteins of interest are cloned into a yeast cell. Each protein is a hybrid, one containing the first protein and the DNA-binding domain of a specific transcription factor, while the other contains the second protein and the activation domain of the same transcription factor. If the two proteins interact, the transcription factor will have both necessary components to activate its target reporter gene, which is typically designed to be easy to assay. More recently, protein chips, which are similar to expression microarrays, have been created. These chips place thousands of proteins on a microscope slide, and then they are washed over by a single sample, thus detecting every interaction between a protein and the rest of the queried proteome. 
All these methods have enabled discovery and characterization of the proteins made by the ~25,000 genes in the human genome. Current estimates suggest that from this relatively small number of coding genes, as many as 2 million distinct proteins may result. Several groups have emerged to tackle the task of accurately cataloging all of these proteins including the Human Proteome Initiative (HPI) and the Human Proteome Organization (HUPO). 
In summary, the complex machinery that regulates the genome can be thought of as encompassing four levels: pretranscriptional regulation (exemplified by the functioning of transcription factors), posttranscriptional regulation (exemplified by miRNAs and siRNAs), posttranslational regulation (exemplified by chemical modification and processing of proteins), and epigenetic regulation. 
If the notion of understanding how these processes contribute to the complex functioning of the human brain and how they might contribute to mental illness was not sufficiently daunting, one need only consider the astronomical potential for diversity inherent in the transcriptome and proteome: Though the human genome is only 3 billion letters long, for every gene with more than one exon, the number of possible transcripts increases at the rate of 2n−1. Consequently, a two-exon gene can be spliced into product containing each one of the two exons, or both combined, totaling three possible transcripts. Similarly, a three-exon gene can be 

========511========

spliced into one of the three exons, or four other combinations (1–2, 2–3, 1–3, 1–2–3), totaling seven, and so on. When this formula is applied to the gene with the most exons in the human genome (titin, with 234 exons), one can see that this one coding unit could theoretically combine into 2.76 × 1070 different transcripts. Additionally, given about 2 million proteins in the human proteome, there exist 4 trillion possible protein–protein interactions. In total, this becomes about 7.0 × 1082 possible gene products and subsequent interactions to examine. As a comparison, the number of atoms in the universe is estimated to be around 4.0 × 1080. Though these numbers are theoretical approximations, they illustrate the vast, potential complexity of the human genome and the need for sophisticated methods to understand it. 
PHARMACOGENOMICS IN NEUROPSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS 
Pharmacogenomics is the effort to characterize gene variants that influence the response to medications with the long-term goal of optimizing the treatment of individual patients. Pharmacogenomic tests are already established in oncology clinical practice. 
In psychiatry, pharmacogenomics has had its greatest impact through characterizing gene variants coding for P450 microsomal enzymes that influence the rate of metabolism of psychotropic medications. These tests have been applied clinically as an alternative to measuring drug blood levels in order to identify whether lack of clinical response could be attributed to rapid drug clearance, necessitating treatment with higher medication doses. They might identify slow metabolizers, who might be more suspectable to medication side effects. To date, pharmacogenomics studies related to the pharmacodynamics actions of psychotropic medications do not yet have sufficient validity or explanatory power for routine clinical use. 
THE BRAIN AS A SYSTEM 
The field of systems biology focuses on the emergent properties of biological systems. There is increasing interest in developing sophisticated computational approaches that enable scientists to evaluate the interplay of genome, transcriptome, proteome, and other emergent properties of the brain, such as behavior. 
Systems biology is a particularly powerful approach to extraordinarily large datasets generated by large-scale international collaborations aiming for a complete functional annotation of the human genome, transcriptome, and proteome. These efforts have been made possible by technological advances that have allowed for the accumulation of very large datasets that encompass the all of the types discussed in this chapter: regulatory sequences, the transcription factors that bind them, the expressed genes (coding and noncoding), their subsequent modifications by other enzymes, 

========512========

the final protein product(s), and the interaction of that protein with any other protein (protein–protein interactions [PPIs]). These data are derived from three sources: (1) computational predictions of transcriptional activity, splicing potential, or protein interactions; (2) experimentally-based observations extracted from published scientific reports and databases; and (3) the use of algorithms that scan all of the world’s published scientific literature and report any interaction with a specific gene or protein of interest (text mining). Additionally, large databases of protein sequences have been compiled and curated, such as UniProt. 
Over the past several years, major advances in bioinformatics and computational biology have allowed entire biochemical or neurological pathway to be modeled and a change in one segment of the pathway (from a mutated exon to a drop in synaptic plasticity) to be traced to every other possibly interacting biological entity. This technique—known as pathway analysis—creates predictions for expected changes to other genes or proteins in the same pathway. Already, several such tools are publicly available online, including Ingenuity, DAVID, KEGG, and Interactome, an effort at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory to build a working model for every interaction (gene–gene, gene–protein, protein–protein) that exists in the human body. 
An extraordinary public resource has recently been created that catalogues region-specific expression analyses in the mouse brain, known as Allen Brain Atlas. This database currently contains a three-dimensional rendering of almost every gene’s expression pattern. The mouse model serves as a good proxy for understanding region-specific brain expression in humans, and, as a result of this comprehensive resource, essentially any gene of interest can be analyzed with all the others for instance to investigate spatial and temporal correlation among groups of genes or across the entire genome. These and other resources are publically available on the World Wide Web (Table 1.11–8). 
FUTURE PROSPECTS 
The brain is the most complex organ in the human body and perhaps the most complex structure known to humanity. Scientists have never before had so many tools and technologies to bring to bear to study the brain. These approaches create an unparalleled ability to gather and merge information about a biological system, but the exact methods by which clinicians and researchers can merge patient data and abstract predictions is a work in progress. 
Though microarrays and cloning have been indispensible techniques, they are already being eclipsed by new technologies. All of the methods currently used for analyzing and understanding an individual patient’s genome are restricted to specific regions, but this is only because of 

========513========

limitations of the current technology. Once each patient’s genome can be sequenced cheaply and quickly, another revolution in the postgenomics era will begin. Instead of searching for mutations or structural abnormalities only in genes or places where a change is suspected, every small- and large- scale genetic variation will be detected for every location in the genome. 
Table 1.11–8. 
Scientific Resources on the World Wide Web 
Electronic Address Description 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov National Center for Biotechnology Information http://www.gdb.org The Genome Database 
http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/ Wellcome Trust genome research center http://www.hapmap.org The HapMap Consortium 
http://www.genome.gov Nation Human Genome Research Institute http://www.rcsb.org/pdb Protein Data Bank 
http://www.harvester.embl.de Collection of human proteins and all predictions http://www.genome.gov/10005107 The ENCODE project 
http://genome.ucsc.edu/ UCSC Genome Bioinformatics Center http://arep.med.harvard.edu/PGP/ Personal Genome Project 
http://www.brainatlas.org/aba/ Allen Brain Atlas from Mouse Brains http://www.geneontology.org/ Functional Annotation of Genes (Ontology) http://bluebrain.epfl.ch/ Reverse Engineering of the Mammalian Brain http://www.e-cell.org/ Model and Reconstruct Biology in silico http://www.proteinlounge.com/ Database and Research Tools for Proteins http://openwetware.org/ Group to share tools for making organisms http://interactome.org/ Modeling all interactions in Biology 
Clearly, the availability of a complete picture of each patient’s DNA will vastly empower efforts to identify that proportion of genetic variation that contributes to mental disorders, influences therapeutic response, and mediates the results of environmental stressors. There is no doubt that recent discoveries have already heralded the first steps toward the development of personalized genomic medicine. The so-called $1,000 genome will be a major step toward realizing this potential. The tremendous payoff from molecular genetics will greatly enhance the understanding of DNA sequence and structural changes; these important first steps will be critical in dissecting the molecular neurobiology of mental disorders and in developing new therapeutics. 
REFERENCES 
An JJ, Gharami K, Liao GY, et al. Distinct role of long 3′ UTR BDNF mRNA in spine morphology and synaptic plasticity in hippocampal neurons. Cell. 2008;134(1):175–187. 
Bass BL. RNA editing by adenosine deaminases that act on RNA. Annu Rev Biochem. 2002;71:817–846. 
Capra JA, Erwin GD, McKinsey G, Rubenstein JL, Pollard KS. Many human accelerated regions 

========514========

are developmental enhancers. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013;368(1632):20130025. Drozda K, Müller DJ, Bishop JR Pharmacogenomic testing for neuropsychiatric drugs: Current status of drug labeling, guidelines for using genetic information, and test options. Pharmacotherapy. 2014;34(2):166–184. 
Dulai KS, von Dornum M, Mollon JD, Hunt DM. The evolution of trichromatic color vision by opsin gene duplication in New World and Old World primates. Genome Res. 1999;9(7):629– 638. 
ENCODE Project Consortium. Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1% of the human genome by the ENCODE pilot project. Nature. 2007;447(7146):799–716. 
Frankish A, Harrow J. GENCODE Pseudogenes. Pseudogenes. New York: Springer; 2014:129– 155. 
Gerstein MB, Bruce C, Rozowsky JS, et al. What is a gene, post-ENCODE? History and updated definition. Genome Res. 2007;17(6):669–681. 
Jens M, Nikolaus R. Competition between target sites of regulators shapes post-transcriptional gene regulation. Nat Rev Genet. 2015;16(2):113–126. 
Kapranov P, Willingham AT, Gingeras TR. Genome-wide transcription and the implications for genomic organization. Nat Rev Genet. 2007;8(6):413–423. 
Kellis M, Wold B, Snyder MP, et al. Defining functional DNA elements in the human genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014;111(17):6131–6138. 
Khaja R, Zhang J, MacDonald JR, et al. Genome assembly comparison identifies structural variants in the human genome. Nat Genet. 2006;38(12):1413–1418. 
King MC, Wilson AC. Evolution at two levels in humans and chimpanzees. Science. 1975;188:107–116. 
Lander ES, et al, International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature. 2001;409(6822):860–921. 
Levy S, Sutton G, Ng PC, et al. The diploid genome sequence of an individual human. PLoS Biol. 2007;5(10):e254. 
Liu GE, Alkan C, Jiang L, et al. Comparative analysis of Alu repeats in primate genomes. Genome Res. 2009;19:876–885. 
Mendel JG. Versuche über pflanzenhybriden. In: Verhandlungen des naturforschenden Vereines in Brünn 4. Abhandlungen; 1866:3–47. 
Meyer KD, Saletore Y, Zumbo P, et al. Comprehensive analysis of mRNA Methylation reveals enrichment in 3’ UTRs and near stop Codons. Cell. 2012;149(7):1635–1646. 
Oldham MC, Horvath S, Geschwind DH. Conservation and evolution of gene coexpression networks in human and chimpanzee brains. PNAS. 2006;103(47):17973–17978. 
Paz-Yaacov N, Levanon EY, Nevo E, et al. Adenosine-to-inosine RNA editing shapes transcriptome diversity in primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010;107(27):12174–12179. Pipes L, Li S, Bozinoski M, et al. The non-human primate reference transcriptome resource (NHPRTR) for comparative functional genomics. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41(D1):D906–D914. Plotkin JB, Grzegorz K. Synonymous but not the same: the causes and consequences of codon bias. Nat Rev Genetics. 2011;12(1):32–42. 
Pollard KS, Salama SR, King B, et al. Forces shaping the fastest evolving regions in the human genome. PLoS Genet. 2006;2(10):e168. 

========515========

Pollard KS, Salama SR, Lambert N, et al. An RNA gene expressed during cortical development evolved rapidly in humans. Nature. 2006;443(7108):167–172. 
Stolc V, Gauhar Z, Mason C, et al. A gene expression map for the euchromatic genome of Drosophila melanogaster. Science. 2004;306(5696):655–660. 
Venter JC, Adams MD, Myers EW, et al. The sequence of the human genome. Science. 2001;291(5507):1304–1351. 
Wang HY, Chien HC, Osada N, et al. Rate of evolution in brain-expressed genes in humans and other primates. PLoS Biol. 2007;5(2):e13. 
Wilson FH, Hariri A, Farhi A, et al. A cluster of metabolic defects caused by mutation in a mitochondrial tRNA. Science. 2004;306(5699):1190–1194. 
Zhang ZD, Paccanaro A, Fu Y, et al. Statistical analysis of the genomic distribution and correlation of regulatory elements in the ENCODE regions. Genome Res. 2007;17(6):787–797. 

========516========

▲ 1.12 Psychoneuroendocrinology 
DEBRA S. HARRIS, M.D., OWEN M. WOLKOWITZ, M.D., AND VICTOR I. REUS, M.D. 
Endocrine disorders are frequently associated with secondary psychiatric symptoms, such as depressed mood and disturbances in thought. In addition, certain psychiatric syndromes are associated with distinct patterns of endocrine dysfunction. The term psychoneuroendocrinology encompasses the inextricable structural and functional relationships between hormonal systems and the CNS and behaviors that modulate and are derived from both. Classically, hormones have been defined as the products of endocrine glands transported by the blood to exert their action at sites distant from their release. Advances in neuroscience have shown, however, that in the CNS the brain not only serves as a target site for regulatory control of hormonal release but also has secretory functions of its own and serves as an end-organ for some hormonal actions. These complex interrelationships make classic distinctions between the origin, structure, and function of neurons and those of endocrine cells dependent on physiological context. Multiple interactions between the endocrine and immune systems have pointed to a parallel regulatory complexity. 
HORMONE EVOLUTION 
Over the course of evolution, as organisms have increased in complexity, hormones that first appeared in unicellular organisms have been recruited to serve a multiplicity of functions, a quality that is referred to as pleiotropy. A single hormone may act at multiple sites, including binding to receptors on the membrane, cytoplasm, or nucleus, each with different effects, and subtle differences in molecular structure or metabolic processing can have profound physiological consequences. Hormones are thus ideally suited to regulate complex behavioral activities and to play a role in the plasticity of the organism, allowing it to adapt to the changing demands of the environment, as, for example, in the alteration of sexual phenotype in certain amphibians and reptiles in response to changing environmental conditions. 
HORMONE CLASSIFICATION 
Hormones are divided into two general classes by structure—(1) proteins, polypeptides, and glycoproteins; and (2) steroids and steroid-like compounds—and into three classes by location of function (Tables 1.12–1 and 1.12–2). In addition to classical action on a target tissue, hormones may also act as neuromodulators, regulating the effects of neurotransmitters and, in some cases, meeting criteria for 

========517========

neurotransmitter function independently. 
HORMONE SECRETION 
Hormone secretion is stimulated by the action of a neuronal secretory product of neuroendocrine transducer cells of the hypothalamus. Examples of hormone regulators (Table 1.12–3) include corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which stimulates adrenocorticotropin (ACTH); TRH, which stimulates release of TSH; gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulates release of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle- stimulating hormone (FSH); and somatostatin (somatotropin release- inhibiting factor [SRIF]) and growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH), which influence growth hormone (GH) release. Chemical signals cause the release of these neurohormones from the median eminence of the hypothalamus into the portal hypophyseal bloodstream and subsequent transport to the pituitary to regulate the release of target hormones. Pituitary hormones in turn act directly on target cells (e.g., ACTH on the adrenal gland) or stimulate the release of other hormones from peripheral endocrine organs. In addition, these hormones have feedback actions that regulate secretion and exert neuromodulatory effects in the CNS. 
HORMONE SYNTHESIS AND STRUCTURE 
Peptide hormones represent subsections of larger amino acid chains or polypeptides called prohormones. Production of a peptide hormone occurs by the cleavage of its prohormone chain at a given site on the chain by the appropriate enzyme. Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) is an example of a prohormone that contains the sequences for ACTH, β-endorphin, β- lipotropin, and melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH). Some hormones, called dimers, contain two or more peptide chains (e.g., FSH, LH, and TSH). Further cleavage of these hormone peptide chains in the course of metabolism may create additional biologically active peptides that have different effects from those of the parent peptide, and even minor modifications of structure can drastically change binding properties and metabolic processing. 
Table 1.12–1. 
Classification of Hormones by Structure 
Structure Proteins, 
polypeptides, 
and 
glycoproteins Steroids and 
steroid-like 
Examples 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone, β-endorphin, thyrotropin- 
releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone, follicle- 
stimulating hormone 
Storage Vesicles 
Lipid Soluble No 
Cortisol, estrogens, testosterone, progesterone, 
dehydroepiandrosterone 
Diffusion 
after 
Yes 

========518========

compounds 
synthesis 
Tropic hormones, such as ACTH and gonadotropins, in turn, induce steroidogenesis in two distinct ways. Acute regulation occurs through activation and rapid synthesis (over minutes) of steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein, which regulates the rate-limiting step of steroid hormone synthesis, the transport of cholesterol from the outer to the inner mitochondrial membrane. In contrast, chronic stimulation induces transcription, increases P450scc protein, and steroidogenesis over hours to days. 
CELLULAR MODE OF ACTION 
Genomic 
The first known mode of action of steroid hormones (glucocorticoids, estrogen, and testosterone) and thyroid hormones (triiodothyronine [T3] and thyroxine [T4]) is by binding to intracellular receptors in the cytoplasm. The hormone–receptor complex in turn binds to common response elements on chromosomal DNA and alters transcription through a conformational change that unmasks the binding site. The hormone complex can also interact with transcription factors such as those produced by c-fos, c-jun, or activator protein-1 (AP-1) to amplify or to inhibit gene expression and, by these mechanisms, regulate the induction of such gene products as enzymes and other cell proteins that affect metabolic change. 
Nongenomic 
Alternatively, as in the case of estrogen-stimulated prolactin release, certain hormones may exert a physiological effect within seconds to minutes, a time course precluding a genomic mechanism. Nongenomic action is hypothesized to involve membrane hormone receptors. Some nongenomic effects appear to be mediated through distinct, nonclassical membrane receptors in that they are not blocked by classical receptor inhibitors and do not require gene transcription, protein synthesis, or a coagonist. Hormones also may act through ion-gated neurotransmitter receptors as coagonists or antagonists, as in the modulation of GABA type A (GABAA) receptors by neurosteroids, or by altering the fluidity and microenvironment of membrane receptors through the intercalation of the steroid in the phospholipid bilayers. Genomic and nongenomic mechanisms may be active simultaneously, with cross-talk a likely occurrence. 
Table 1.12–2. 
Classification of Hormones by Location of Function 

========519========

Hormone Classification Autocrine 
Paracrine 
Endocrine 
Function 
Self-regulatory effects Local or adjacent cellular action Distant target site 
Combined Action 
An example of a hormone-induced behavioral response with both genomic and nongenomic mechanisms is corticosteroid stimulation of aggressive behavior in rats. A rapid surge of glucocorticoids precedes the aggressive behavior, but early and later stimulation of aggressive behavior is mediated differently. The initial phase is promoted by a nongenomic mechanism needed for rapid response, which can play a decisive role in the outcome of the encounter. (In the case of rats, an early aggressive response may scare off the intruder and avoid a Fight.) The effects of this mechanism rapidly subside, and aggressive behavior in later phases is stimulated by genomic mechanisms. This later, genomic corticosteroid-stimulated behavior is blocked by a protein synthesis inhibitor, but earlier nongenomic stimulation of aggression is not. Besides meeting the immediate need for rapid action, the nongenomic mechanism may serve the purpose of preparing for the genomic response by activating changes needed for aggressive response, such as changes in energy metabolism. 
Tissue Specificity 
Many hormones, such as estrogen, act through a multistep process involving a hormone–receptor complex. This complex binds to specific DNA sites called hormone response elements. Formation of a cluster with coactivators, corepressors, and transcriptional factors stimulates transcription and protein synthesis, with the response specific to the type of cell. Tissue specificity may arise from several mechanisms. Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) are synthetic hormones developed to target certain actions while avoiding other unwanted responses through coactivators or repressors or other elements of the cluster that do not recognize the SERM in certain tissues. Alternatively, many hormones, such as estrogen or DHEA, may act directly or indirectly as a prohormone to be converted into other hormones in specific tissues. For example, tibolone is a synthetic hormone structurally related to 19-nortestosterone derivatives that has weak estrogen, progestogen, and androgen effects in specific tissues, in part because it is differentially metabolized. Accordingly, it has been used to reduce hot flashes and sweating, improve mood and libido and sexual functioning, decrease bone loss, stimulate semantic memory, and lessen vaginal atrophy without stimulating the growth of endometrium or breast tissue as do estrogens. 

========520========

Table 1.12–3. 
Examples of Regulating Hormones 
Regulating Hormone 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone Thyrotropin-releasing hormone Luteinizing-hormone-releasing hormone Gonadotropin-releasing hormone Somatostatin 
Growth hormone–releasing hormone Progesterone, oxytocin 
Arginine vasopressin 
enhancement is 
termed 
Hormone Stimulated (or Inhibited) Adrenocorticotropic hormone Thyroid-stimulated hormone Luteinizing hormone 
Follicle-stimulating hormone Growth hormone (inhibited) Growth hormone 
Prolactin 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
Facilitation of a previously 
CHARACTERISTICS OF ENDOCRINE ACTIVITY 
In general, hormonal compounds often exert their effect in a tonic rather than phasic fashion, being diffused in a less precise manner than a neurotransmitter and over a longer time period. Theoretically, such a characterization would allow hormones to be more closely linked to integrated behavioral responses. Release of many hormones is pulsatile, and the pattern of these pulses (i.e., duration, interpulse interval, slope of increase or decrease in rate, and amplitude) is crucial to their effects. Other factors that can influence the regulation and effect of a hormone in a given individual include genetic differences, a history of exposure to the hormone during critical developmental encoding periods, the frequency and chronicity of past exposure, the time since last exposure, and the status of other influences on the target system. A decrease in the amplitude of response after repeated exposure is referred to as habituation, and an 
sensitization. 
habituated response after exposure to a novel stimulus or more severe stressor is called dishabituation (i.e., this allows enhancement of the previously habituated response to cope more effectively with the stimulus). In the case of the HPA system, the release of cortisol by the adrenal gland is dependent on an integration of three separate control systems. These include an underlying circadian rhythm regulated by the SCN; a stress- responsive circuit involving inputs to the hypothalamus from the brainstem, limbic system, and cerebral cortex; and a feedback control system exerted through two classes of corticosteroid receptor. 
PHARMACOGENETICS AND PHARMACOGENOMICS 
The study of pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics is leading to a better understanding of the mechanisms of psychopathology and its response to treatment. Pharmacogenetics refers to the effects of single genes. Pharmacogenomics is the genome-wide approach to discovering individual differences in the outcome of drug therapy. Recent studies of treatment response to antidepressants suggest that polymorphisms in some 

========521========

genes, such as for glucocorticoid receptors (GRs), CRH receptor 1, and a GR-regulating cochaperone, can predict treatment outcome or rapidity of response, but to date studies have been of insufficient size, and the findings are difficult to replicate. Larger scale GWAS are needed. Polymorphisms in genes that regulate hormonal response or in genes for other chemical messengers that modulate hormonal activity may also explain treatment responsiveness through more indirect mechanisms. Examples include genes for neurotrophic factors; excitatory cytokines, such as TNF; α- adrenergic receptors; GABA receptors; and metabolizing enzymes, such as MAO. Treatment interventions, including nonpharmacological ones such as exercise, can produce changes in the expression of certain genes that may be more beneficial to those with particular genotypes. Use of genetically engineered mice has allowed the targeting of specific genes for the study of the dysfunction of hormonal systems in relation to anxiety and depression, including peptides modulating hormone release, receptors, binding proteins, and proteins controlling the access of hormones into the CNS. This research is still in its early stages, but the clinical implications of discovering genetic differences as biomarkers for subtyping of the disorder and selection of treatment agent are exciting. 
DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHONEUROENDOCRINOLOGY AND EPIGENETIC TRANSMISSION 
Although a review of the effect of hormones on brain development is beyond the scope of this chapter, it is important to note that hormones can have organizational as well as activational effects. Exposure to gonadal hormones during critical stages of neural development directs changes in brain morphology and function (e.g., sex-specific behavior in adulthood) and differentiation of dopaminergic neurons. Similarly, thyroid hormones are essential for the normal development of the CNS, and thyroid deficiency during critical stages of postnatal life severely impairs growth and development of the brain, resulting in behavioral disturbances that may be permanent if replacement therapy is not instituted. Prenatal exposure in animals to endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoids or to stressful circumstances reduces offspring birth weight and may result in long-lasting changes in immune response, hypertension, hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, cardiovascular function, and neuroendocrine responses and behavior, including attentional deficits, increased anxiety, and disturbed social behavior. Maternal deprivation in strains of rats with increased glucocorticoid response to stress has similarly been shown to lead to increased startle responses, anxiety-like behavior, increased alcohol preference, and difficulties with spatial learning in adulthood. 
Epigenetic transmission occurs through changes in chromatin and DNA structure that do not involve changes in the sequence of DNA but which alter gene expression and phenotype. Maternal behavior can cause 

========522========

epigenetic alterations to steroid receptor genes and produce long-term changes influencing postpartum behavior. Cross-fostered rats show maternal care behaviors similar to those of their “adoptive” mother, rather than to those of their biological parent. This change in hormone-influenced behavior is thought to involve estrogen and oxytocin receptor changes. 
PSYCHONEUROENDOCRINOLOGY METHODOLOGY IN HUMANS 
Human studies are often limited to examining the relationship between hormone concentrations or changes in concentration and psychiatric disease states, symptoms, neurotransmitter function, or response to treatment. Concentrations may be measured in plasma, urine, saliva, CSF, or postmortem tissue and are sometimes used as indicators of regulatory neurotransmitter function in response to a given stimulus. For example, cortisol or prolactin response to d-fenfluramine has been used to assess serotonin activity and GH response to clonidine (Catapres) to assess dopaminergic function. 
One example of a provocative psychoendocrine test used to assess the HPA system is the combined dexamethasone–CRH test, which assesses response to two hormonal stimuli, one inhibiting (dexamethasone [Decadron]) and the other stimulating (CRH), on cortisol secretion. Typically, 1.5 mg of dexamethasone is given in the evening, and plasma cortisol concentration is measured 16 hours later on the following day. An infusion of 100 μg of CRH is then given, and cortisol level and ACTH are measured again several times over the next 75 minutes. Abnormalities in this test are found in a variety of psychiatric illnesses, including bipolar disorder, major depression, schizophrenia, and PTSD, although the sensitivity or specificity for these disorders does not make the test a reliable diagnostic tool. Several studies or case reports have suggested an association between changes in suppression and outcome for these disorders. 
Another method of studying the relationship of hormones to psychiatric disorders is the administration of hormones or other secretagogues (substances that cause other substances to be secreted) to experimentally correct an abnormal hormone concentration and examine the effects. Some secretagogues can be given orally to replace a parenterally administered hormone and be given multiple times during a day to mimic circadian rhythms or other variations in concentration when studying circadian effects. 
Functional brain imaging studies can help localize the areas of changed activity produced by hormonal action affecting a variety of cognitive and behavioral activities. 
HYPOTHALAMIC–PITUITARY–ADRENAL AXIS 
Since the earliest conceptions of the stress response by Hans Selye and 

========523========

others, investigation of HPA function has occupied a central position in psychoendocrine research. CRH, ACTH, and cortisol are all elevated in response to a variety of physical and psychological stresses and serve as prime factors in the maintenance of homeostasis and the development of adaptive responses to novel or challenging stimuli. Glucocorticoids regulate glucose metabolism, blood pressure, immune response, lipid metabolism, glycogen deposition, and energy homeostasis for Fight or flight response and are essential for embryonic development and neonatal survival. A normal glucocorticoid stress response helps to recover after the challenge and helps to store the experience for coping with future encounters, although sustained levels may impair some forms of memory. The hormonal response is dependent not only on the characteristics of the stressor itself but also on how the individual assesses and is able to cope with it. In primates, social status can influence adrenocortical profiles and, in turn, can be affected by exogenously induced changes in hormone concentration. Aside from generalized effects on arousal, distinct effects on sensory processing, stimulus habituation and sensitization, pain, sleep, and memory storage and retrieval also have been documented with CRH, ACTH, and cortisol (or corticosterone). 
Exposure to chronic stress produces increased concentrations of CRH and AVP in the PVN of the hypothalamus and, over time, leads to a reduction in CRH receptor number in the anterior pituitary. Release of CRH results in a simultaneous activation of the locus coeruleus noradrenergic circuit, which functionally increases arousal and selective attention and decreases vegetative functions, such as appetite and sex drive. ACTH concentrations are increased in acute stress but diminish over time in chronic stress. 
GRs are ubiquitously distributed throughout the body. At least two intracellular receptor subtypes bind corticosteroids: The mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) (or type I receptor) and the GR (or type II receptor). The human GR has an α and a β form, the α form showing high affinity for dexamethasone, modest affinity for cortisol, and low affinity for aldosterone, deoxycortisol, and the sex steroids; and the β form acting as a negative regulator. MRs have high affinity but low capacity, whereas GRs have low affinity but high capacity. Owing to the difference in affinity, low corticosteroid levels generally result in a predominant MR occupation, with higher steroid levels shifting the balance in favor of the GR. “Permissive actions” of MR activation before the onset of stress are tonically involved in the mediation of the initial stress response. When more GRs become occupied, local excitability may decrease or, in some cases, may increase on a short-term basis to inhibit or enhance the initial effects of stress- responsive hormones. Over time, continued stress produces increasing “allostatic load,” the sustained effects of hypercortisolemia giving rise to hyperglycemia, increased visceral fat, elevated blood pressure, decreased 

========524========

bone density, hyperlipidemia, and changes in electrolytes and immune response. Interactions between MR and GR in the hippocampus may be relevant to understanding the regulation of stress response in depression and the efficacy of antidepressants. Studies of GR function have pointed to a relevant decrement in response to agonist in depressed patients, but MR function is generally preserved. 
Three types of inhibitory feedback of glucocorticoids on CRH and ACTH have been characterized. Fast, rate-sensitive feedback occurs, while plasma concentrations of the glucocorticoid are rising and regulate release rather than synthesis of CRH and ACTH. Intermediate, delayed feedback occurs from 1 to 2 hours after steroid administration, is dose-sensitive and duration-sensitive rather than rate-sensitive, and inhibits the release of CRH and ACTH as well as the synthesis of CRH. Slow feedback is similar to intermediate feedback but occurs over a longer period of time (hours) and is distinguished by decreased synthesis of CRH and ACTH (and other POMC derivatives). 
Glucocorticoid release is amplified, at least acutely, by serotonergic and cholinergic input and is inhibited by GABA and opioids. Catecholamines play a role in response to stress and interact with the limbic– hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis. Acute addition of glucocorticoids can increase dopaminergic activity in certain areas of the brain, but chronic hypercortisolemia may decrease dopamine activity (depending on the region involved). Glucocorticoids may exert their influence on dopamine activities by functioning as a transcriptional regulator, by acting on promoter regions of dopamine receptors, and by modulating catecholamine biosynthesis. 
Pathological alterations in HPA function have been associated with a number of psychiatric disorders, including mood disorders, PTSD, dementias, and substance use disorders (SUDs). Disturbances of mood are found in more than 50 percent of patients with Cushing syndrome (characterized by elevated cortisol concentrations), with psychosis or suicidal thought apparent in more than 10 percent of cases studied. Cognitive impairments similar to those seen in MDD are common and relate to the degree of hypercortisolemia present and a possible reduction in hippocampal size. In general, therapeutically induced reductions in cortisol levels result in a normalization of mood and mental status. Mifepristone (RU486) has been reported to ameliorate psychosis and depression in Cushing’s patients, and several studies have reported that it also alleviated psychosis or depression in psychotic depression not associated with Cushing syndrome. In Addison disease (characterized by adrenal insufficiency and diminished glucocorticoid output), apathy, social withdrawal, impaired sleep, and decreased concentration frequently accompany prominent fatigue. Replacement of glucocorticoid results in resolution of behavioral symptomatology, although correction of the 

========525========

associated electrolyte disturbances by itself does not. 
Exogenous administration of synthetic corticosteroids is commonly associated with mild activation, but a higher dose and more sustained treatment may produce depression, mood lability, memory and attentional impairment, and sometimes psychosis. Alterations in HPA function associated with depression include elevated cortisol concentrations, failure to suppress cortisol in response to dexamethasone, increased adrenal size and sensitivity to ACTH, a blunted ACTH response to CRH, and elevated CRH concentrations in brain. In addition to altered slow feedback, several groups have demonstrated decreased sensitivity to glucocorticoid fast feedback as well, and increased cortisol near sleep onset and on first awakening have been shown to be predictive of increased risk of future depression. The pattern of these abnormalities has not, thus far, led to a definitive theory of mechanism, and other elements, such as AVP, are important to understanding the change in homeostasis. The finding that corticosteroids have multiple regulatory effects on serotonergic function, particularly on the serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine type 1A [5-HT1A]) receptor, may also be relevant, as may be the state-dependent stimulant- like effects that glucocorticoids can exert on mesencephalic dopamine transmission. 
Excessive glucocorticoid activity may contribute to the symptoms of psychotic mood disorders. Some mood stabilizers, such as lithium, carbamazepine (Tegretol) and valproate, inhibit the transcription activity of GRs and may exert some of their therapeutic effects in this way, and the development of CRH-1 antagonists as potential pharmacotherapies for depression and anxiety disorders, alone or in combination with current antidepressant medications, is currently underway. Cortisol response to CRH or ACTH is abnormal in some psychiatric illnesses, although studies in this area have been highly variable and confusing. For example, in one study, patients with PTSD exhibited low cortisol levels despite high CRH activity, while in another cortisol response to ACTH was increased. 
A number of studies have linked abnormalities in HPA activity, hippocampal volume, and certain memory functions, but it is not clear which is causal. One imaging study of identical twins discordant for PTSD showed similarly diminished hippocampal volume, but treatment of the symptoms of PTSD with SSRIs is followed by increase in hippocampal volume and improvement in memory. Genomic and nongenomic actions of cortisol in hippocampal cells promote enzymatic processes that can lead to cell death, but as the hippocampus mediates negative feedback of cortisol release, hippocampal damage may impair cortisol negative feedback. Increasing glucocorticoid levels by administration or other methods has decreased hippocampal volume in several (but not all) studies in NHPs and other species. PTSD symptoms and cortisol at baseline predicted hippocampal size reduction later in one study, and a decrease in cortisol 

========526========

following the treatment of Cushing disease has been shown to reverse hippocampal atrophy. 
In schizophrenia, difficulty suppressing cortisol after dexamethasone is associated with negative symptoms and cognitive impairment. Clozapine (Clozaril) improves cognitive functioning, possibly in part through preventing or reversing cortisol-induced hippocampal damage, and reverses stress-induced impairment of LTP, a measure of synaptic plasticity important for the storage of information and memory, in the frontal cortex. The GR antagonist mifepristone also blocks cortisol-induced impairment of LTP. 
Stress is often reported as a reason for relapse in substance-dependent individuals, and animal studies suggest that glucocorticoid administration is involved in drug self-administration. Glucocorticoid acute enhancement of dopamine activity likely contributes to the motivational changes involved with drug use. Alcohol usage and withdrawal produce profound changes in HPA regulation, pseudocushingoid features are a phenotypic feature of chronic alcohol intake, and HPA adaptation to alcohol withdrawal varies by family history of alcoholism. There is also suggestive evidence that alteration in HPA response to acute alcohol challenge may represent an endophenotype of genetic risk of dependence. CRH is involved not only in the HPA axis but also in extrahypothalamic systems that play a role in the relapse to alcohol and other drug use after stress. 
Another disorder associated with a disturbance in glucocorticoid negative feedback is polydipsia. Polydipsic schizophrenic patients, particularly those with hyponatremia, show marked impairment in cortisol suppression of ACTH. 
METABOLIC SYNDROME 
Metabolic syndrome is a cluster of multiple metabolic risk factors, including elevated insulin levels and resistance, hyperglycemia, visceral obesity, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension. Glucocorticoids interfere with glucose transport and utilization. The insulin resistance and increased insulin concentrations that develop decrease lipid deployment and increase lipid accumulation. GRs are found in high concentrations in intra- abdominal fat tissue, accounting for the truncal obesity resembling that in Cushing disease. Elevated intracellular glucocorticoid tone is thought to be an etiology of metabolic syndrome. Selective inhibitors of 11β- hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1, which decrease cortisol production, are thus being tested as a therapeutic intervention. Stress can produce these changes, along with increased vascular resistance through effects on the SNS. Many patients with schizophrenia who exhibit increased cortisol and epinephrine have more central obesity, higher plasma cortisol, and an increased risk of diabetes, even when medication free. Many of the atypical antipsychotics and some of the other psychotropic medications also can 

========527========

cause hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, and visceral obesity, limiting their use. Reports of changes in HPA axis hormones with treatment by typical and atypical antipsychotics have been inconsistent. However, atypical antipsychotics may cause more glucose elevation after glucose challenge compared to typicals, putting patients at greater risk to develop diabetes. 
PROOPIOMELANOCORTIN, MELANOCORTINS, MELANOCYTE-STIMULATING HORMONE, AND MELANONIN 
POMC is a prohormone from which several hormones called melanocortins are derived. These include ACTH (described above), melanocortins, and MSH. 
Studies of rodent sexual behavior suggest that the activation of melanocortin receptors may be an avenue to treat women with hypoactive sexual desire, and the development of melanocortin medications for sexual disorders is underway. Blockade of the melanocortin-4 receptor decreases the reinforcing effects of cocaine, and melanocortins may be neuroprotective for ischemic injury, reducing hippocampal cell death, an area important in learning. Inactivating the melanocortin-5 receptor in rats also reduces pheromone-induced aggression. 
MSH, an anterior pituitary peptide, controls the secretion of melatonin and melanin. Melanin is a pigment not only in hair, skin, and eyes but also in neurons in the substantia nigra and the locus coeruleus. Melatonin (described below) is a hormone that plays a major role in regulating the circadian rhythm. Phenothiazines increase pituitary MSH secretion and pigmentation in some patients. In a double-blind, cross-over trial in humans, an infusion of α-MSH resulted in a significant improvement in verbal memory but little change in mood. A dose-related biphasic effect on mood has been reported for MSH-release-inhibiting factor. Recent data indicate that MSH interacts with leptin to counteract NPY, decrease food intake, and increase energy expenditure. It may also antagonize the antidepressant effects and anxiolytic effects of NPY, while also antagonizing the anxiogenic effects of the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1β. MSH inhibitors have been found to decrease dyskinetic movements in animals. 
Melatonin is a pineal hormone that is derived from the serotonin molecule and controls photoperiodically mediated endocrine events (particularly those of the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal [HPG] axis). It also modulates immune function, mood, and reproductive performance; is a potent antioxidant and free-radical scavenger; and may have oncostatic effects. Melatonin has a depressive effect on CNS excitability and exerts neuroprotective effects against excitotoxicity. Melatonin has analgesic effects through its actions on opiate receptors and has regulatory effects on serotonin metabolism. Altered secretory patterns and levels of melatonin have been found in various psychiatric disorders, such as unipolar and 

========528========

bipolar depression, SAD, bulimia, anorexia, schizophrenia, panic disorder, and OCD. Although suppression of melatonin is not necessary for the efficacy of light therapy in SAD, melatonin can be a useful therapeutic agent in the treatment of circadian phase disorders, such as jet lag, and intake of melatonin increases the speed of falling asleep as well as its duration and quality. A number of synthetic melatonin-like drugs have recently been or are being developed as hypnotic agents. 
ENDOGENOUS OPIOIDS 
Since the discovery of endogenous opioid receptors and their endogenous ligands in the early 1970s, research into the possible behavioral roles of such compounds has grown at a rapid pace. At least three different receptor systems for these ligands have been identified (μ, δ, and κ), and each of these has subtypes. Opioid receptors μ, δ, and κ are activated by the endogenous ligands β-endorphin, enkephalins, and dynorphin, respectively, among others. σ-Receptors, originally included because some opioids that suppressed coughing acted on them, are no longer considered opioid receptors. β-Endorphin is the principal opioid peptide prototype and, like ACTH, MSH, and β-lipotropin, is derived from POMC. Methionine enkephalin (met-enkephalin) and leucine enkephalin (leu- enkephalin) are two small pentapeptides that also possess direct opioid activity, met-enkephalin being contained in POMC and another precursor, proenkephalin, and leu-enkephalin being contained in the prohormones proenkephalin and prodynorphin. The best-documented function of the endogenous opiates is analgesia and alteration of pain perception, but effects on stress, appetite regulation, learning and memory, motor activity, and immune function also appear to be of physiological importance. CRF and endogenous opioids also interact to coregulate the locus coeruleus, a role important in early adaptation to stress. 
Early enthusiasm for the idea that a dysfunctional opiate system was etiologically related to schizophrenia has waned in the face of contradictory findings. Increases in various endorphin compounds have been reported in plasma as well as in postmortem brain tissue of patients with schizophrenia, but studies of short-term and long-term treatment with opioid antagonists show no consistent or reproducible effects on psychopathology. However, hypersecretion of opioids in the CNS of patients with PTSD has been postulated to be an adaptive response to traumatic experience, and CSF β-endorphin concentration is inversely related to intrusive and avoidant symptoms of PTSD. Naltrexone (Revia), an opioid receptor antagonist, has decreased symptoms in autistic children and can improve functioning, with decreases in social withdrawal, stereotypy, and abnormal speech being directly related to decreases in β- endorphin levels. 
In animal models, a number of stressors, including those that are purely 

========529========

psychological, induce opiate-mediated effects such as analgesia and hypomotility that are reversed by the opiate antagonist naloxone (Narcan). Several studies have found that concentrations of plasma β-endorphin in humans are correlated with measures of stress elicited by surgery, exercise, parachuting, or pain. Short-term administration of opioid agonists also increases eating, whereas antagonists reduce food intake by as much as 30 percent, diminish intake of fats and highly palatable foods, and increase caloric expenditure. Thus far, however, their long-term use in obesity and eating disorders has not proven clinically useful. Some studies of opioid antagonist treatment have found certain binge parameters (e.g., duration) to be reduced in bulimia, but no studies have demonstrated weight loss in obese subjects. Naltrexone is helpful as an adjunct in the treatment of alcohol as well as opioid dependence, reducing drinking, craving, the high derived from drinking alcohol, and the likelihood that sampling alcohol would precipitate a relapse. In addition to the μ agonist methadone, buprenorphine, a partial μ agonist, has been helpful for opioid dependence probably both because of its alleviation of withdrawal and because of its blockade of opioid-induced euphoria. 
It is well known that exogenous opioids (e.g., heroin and morphine) can induce a euphoric mood state and that exercise increases the release of endogenous opioids and is associated with mood enhancement; these observations, together with findings that exercise-induced mood enhancement is blocked by naloxone, suggest that endogenous opioids are also involved in the mediation of mood. Such conclusions must be moderated, however, by the recognition that additional specific and nonspecific effects on other neurochemical systems are possible contributors to exercise-related mood effects. 
HYPOTHALAMIC–PITUITARY–GONADAL AXIS 
GnRH is a decapeptide that was sequenced and synthesized by Andrew Schally and colleagues in 1971. GnRH administration results in the rapid release of LH and FSH from the pituitary in healthy subjects and, in some pathological states, such as acromegaly, an abnormal release of GH or prolactin. The cell bodies of GnRH are located principally over the optic chiasm in the arcuate area, with projections to the median eminence, and in the lamina terminalis. GnRH release is stimulated by norepinephrine and is inhibited through negative feedback of gonadal steroids. Administration of GnRH can result in a depressive-like state, characterized by hot flashes, anxiety, insomnia, decreased libido, and fatigue in euthymic subjects, but it is not known whether this is a direct effect of the agent or is caused by the hypoestrogenic state that is produced when GnRH is given continuously. A GnRH analog has been found to have some efficacy in the treatment of paraphilia by decreasing testosterone. 
The gonadal hormones (progesterone, androstenedione, testosterone, 

========530========

E2, and others) are steroids that are secreted principally by the ovary and testis, but significant amounts of androgens arise from the adrenal cortex as well. The prostate gland and adipose tissue are also involved in the synthesis and storage of dihydrotestosterone and contribute to individual variance in sexual function and behavior. 
The timing and presence of gonadal hormones play a critical role in the development of sexual dimorphisms in the brain. Developmentally, these hormones direct the organization of many sexually dimorphic CNS structures and functions, such as the size of the hypothalamic nuclei (INAH3) and corpus callosum, the neuronal density in the temporal cortex, the organization of language ability, and the responsiveness in Broca area. Women with congenital adrenal hyperplasia, a deficiency of the enzyme 21- hydroxylase leading to high exposure to adrenal androgens in prenatal and postnatal life, have been found to be more aggressive and less interested in “traditional female roles” than control female subjects. Sexual dimorphisms may also reflect acute and reversible actions of relative steroid concentrations (e.g., higher estrogen levels transiently increase CNS sensitivity to serotonin). The importance of timing in the exposure to sex steroids is highlighted by studies of administration in gender identity disordered adults. These individuals perform on cognitive tests according to their physical gender and not to their perceived gender. Treatment with sex steroids produces substantial cross-sex changes but no changes in cognitive performance. 
Testosterone 
Testosterone is the primary androgenic steroid, having androgenic (i.e., facilitating male gonadal development) and anabolic (i.e., facilitating linear body growth and somatic growth) functions. Testosterone is important for sexual desire in men and women. In males, muscle mass and strength, sexual activity, desire, thoughts, and intensity of sexual feelings are dependent on normal testosterone levels, but these functions are not clearly augmented by supplementing testosterone in those with normal androgen levels. The addition of small amounts of testosterone to normal hormonal replacement in postmenopausal women has, however, proven to be as beneficial as its use in hypogonadal men. Testosterone has both genomic and nongenomic actions, including acting directly at the cell membrane or modulating the activity of other membrane receptors or second messengers and regulating the actions of a wide range of neurotransmitters. 
Testosterone administration has been shown to result in increased violence and aggression in animals, and testosterone level tends to be correlated with aggression in humans, but anecdotal reports of increased aggression with testosterone treatment have not been uniformly 

========531========

substantiated in human scientific investigations. Reports may be confounded by factors such as past history and social factors, which are particularly important determinants of the effects of hormones in primates and in humans. For instance, in the cynomolgus monkey, administration of testosterone increases dominant behavior in dominant monkeys and submissive behavior in submissive monkeys; in hypogonadal men, it improves mood and decreases irritability. Psychological tests such as the Point Subtraction Aggression Paradigm have been developed to measure aggression in a human laboratory setting and support the clinically observed association between increased testosterone and aggression, although personality characteristics are confounding factors. Free testosterone in the CSF has been associated with measures of aggression, sensation seeking and monotony avoidance, suspiciousness, and reduced socialization, and testosterone-induced aggression in mice has been associated with a decrease in brain allopregnanolone. Abnormal testosterone levels have been inconsistently reported in a variety of disorders, including schizophrenia, PTSD, depression, and anorexia. Studies of testosterone treatment in depression have generally been inconclusive, although two randomized, placebo-controlled trials found intramuscular (IM) therapy effective in eugonadal men with late-life depression and testosterone gel supplementation efficacious in refractory depression. Testosterone may play a role in PMS, as concentrations are higher in those with the disorder. Testosterone has also been reported to improve mood and fatigue in HIV-positive men. 
Anabolic steroids are synthetic derivatives of testosterone modified to enhance their anabolic actions, such as muscle growth, rather than their androgenic actions. Varying effects of anabolic-androgenic steroids on a wide variety of moods have been noted anecdotally. In one prospective placebo-controlled study of anabolic-androgenic steroid administration in normal subjects, positive mood symptoms, including euphoria, increased energy, and sexual arousal, were reported, in addition to increases in negative mood symptoms of irritability, mood swings, violent feelings, anger, and hostility. In addition to a variety of adverse physical effects, anabolic steroids can cause a variety of adverse psychiatric effects, including aggressive behavior, mood and psychotic disturbances, and psychological dependence, particularly when taken in high doses. 
Dehydroepiandrosterone 
DHEA and DHEA-S are adrenal androgens secreted in response to ACTH and represent the most abundant circulating steroids. DHEA is also a neurosteroid that is synthesized in situ in the brain. DHEA has many physiological effects, including reduction in neuronal damage from glucocorticoid excess and oxidative stress. Behavioral interest has centered on its possible involvement in memory, mood, and a number of psychiatric 

========532========

disorders. Adrenarche is the prepubertal onset of adrenal production of DHEA-S and may play a role in human maturation through increasing the activity of the amygdala and hippocampus and promoting synaptogenesis in the cerebral cortex. DHEA has been shown to act as an excitatory neurosteroid and to enhance memory retention in mice, but studies of DHEA administration to humans have not consistently shown any improvement in cognition. Several trials of DHEA administration point to an improvement in well-being, mood, energy, libido, and functional status in depressed individuals. Administration of DHEA to women with adrenal insufficiency (e.g., Addison disease) has repeatedly been demonstrated to enhance mood, energy, and sexual function; effects in men remain to be assessed. Mood, fatigue, and libido improved in HIV-positive patients treated with DHEA in one study, and DHEA and DHEA-S have been found to be inversely correlated with severity in ADHD. Women diagnosed with fibromyalgia have significantly decreased DHEA-S levels, but supplementation does not improve outcome. Several cases of possible DHEA-induced mania have been reported, and DHEA has been reported to be inversely related to extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) in schizophrenics treated with antipsychotics. DHEA administration in these cases improves EPS. 
Double-blind treatment studies have shown antidepressant effects of DHEA in patients with major depression, midlife-onset dysthymia, and schizophrenia, although beneficial effects on memory have not been reliably demonstrated. A small, double-blind trial of DHEA treatment of Alzheimer disease failed to reveal significant benefit, although a near- significant improvement in cognitive function was seen after 3 months of treatment. 
Animal studies suggest that DHEA may be involved in eating behavior, aggressiveness, and anxiety as well, with its effects resulting from its transformation into estrogen, testosterone, or androsterone from its antiglucocorticoid activity, or from direct effects on GABAA, NMDA, and σ- receptors. Because of the putative antiglucocorticoid effects, the ratio of cortisol to DHEA levels may be particularly important in understanding adaptive responses to stress. Both cortisol and DHEA appear to be involved in fear conditioning, with the cortisol/DHEA ratio hypothesized to be an index of the degree to which an individual is buffered against the negative effects of stress. This ratio has been found to be related to some measures of psychopathology and response to treatment, predicting the persistence of the first episode major depression and being related to degree of depression, anxiety, and hostility in schizophrenics and response to antipsychotic treatment. PTSD patients have higher DHEA levels and lower cortisol/DHEA ratios related to symptom severity, suggesting a role in PTSD recovery. Fear-potentiated startle is larger in individuals with high as compared to low cortisol/DHEA-S ratios and is positively associated with 

========533========

cortisol and negatively with DHEA-S. Greater DHEA response to ACTH is related to lower PTSD ratings, and the cortisol/DHEA ratio to negative mood symptoms. A genetic variation in an ACTH receptor promoter has been found to influence DHEA secretion in response to dexamethasone and may underlie some individual differences in stress response. 
Estrogen and Progesterone 
Sex differences in the prevalence or expression of psychopathology or response to treatment may be caused by differences in the concentrations of hormones or gender-related CNS differences in brain morphology and function. Mood and some other psychiatric disturbances are particularly likely to occur during times of sex hormone changes in women, such as the postpartum period, premenstrually, and perimenopause. The primary estrogens are estradiol (E2), estrone (E1), and estriol (E3), with E2 being the major secretory product of the ovaries. Two different estrogen receptors have been identified (α and β), each with different anatomical distributions and physiological effects. Estrogens can influence neural activity in the hypothalamus and limbic system directly through the modulation of neuronal excitability and have complex multiphasic effects on nigrostriatal dopamine receptor sensitivity. Estrogens also enhance dopamine synthesis and release, modify basal firing rates, and can lead to stereotypical behavior in rodents. Accordingly, there is evidence that the antipsychotic effects of psychiatric drugs may change over the menstrual cycle and that the risk of tardive dyskinesia is partly dependent on estrogen concentrations. However, studies of symptom changes in schizophrenic women show significant differences for anxiety–depression and withdrawal–retardation subscales but not for psychotic subscales across the menstrual cycle. Nevertheless, lower levels of estrogen are associated with episodes of acute psychosis in both women and men and with more severe negative symptomatology as well as poorer cognitive function. Estrogen pretreatment attenuates anticholinergic drug-induced problems with attention. 
Several studies have suggested that gonadal steroids modulate spatial cognition and verbal memory and are involved in impeding age-related neuronal degeneration. There is also some evidence that estrogen administration may decrease the risk and delay the onset of dementia of the Alzheimer type in postmenopausal women, but acute treatment in dementia has been ineffective in reducing symptoms. 
Estrogen has mood-enhancing properties and can also increase sensitivity to serotonin, possibly by inhibiting MAO; in animal studies, long-term estrogen treatment results in a decrease in 5-HT1 and an increase in 5-HT2 receptors. In oophorectomized women, significant reductions in tritiated imipramine binding sites (which modulate 

========534========

presynaptic serotonin uptake) were restored with estrogen treatment. Severe postpartum depression has been successfully treated with sublingual 17-β-estradiol, as have depressive disorders in perimenopausal women in a large, randomized, double-blind trial. Prophylactic estrogen administration has been reported to prevent recurrence of postpartum depression. 
Associations between response to antidepressant treatment and age group in women have been found. Low-dose estrogen augmentation of antidepressant medication for perimenopausal women is reported to improve mood, and poorer response to SSRI treatment in older women can be eliminated by hormone replacement therapy. Inadequate response to SSRIs may be due to a chronic hypoestrogenic state, as serotonin receptor binding appears to be estrogen-dependent. Tamoxifen (Nolvadex), a SERM used to treat breast cancer, showed beneficial effects on mania in one study. The greater sensitivity of women to certain kinds of stress may also be attributed in part to differences in tissue sensitivity. Brain norepinephrine system activation, for example, may be stronger in women because of the differential postsynaptic sensitivity of locus coeruleus neurons to CRH. Many of estrogen’s psychiatric effects also could be mediated through its stimulation of BDNF or NPY through the estrogen– BDNF–NPY cascade (see Neuropeptide Y). 
Progesterone, the primary progestin, is produced by the corpus luteum of the ovary. Although progesterone itself may be anxiogenic, metabolites of progesterone (allopregnanolone and pregnenolone) appear to have anxiolytic and hypnotic properties via GABAA agonistic activity. Progesterone is colocalized with serotonin in cells of the median raphe and causes increased serotonin uptake and turnover in the brain in several species. Progesterone, which has antiestrogen effects, such as downregulating estrogen receptors and increasing MAO activity, is often associated with dysphoric mood. The ratio of progestin to estrogen in oral contraceptives has been associated with negative mood change, although this effect varies with depression history. 
The association of these hormones with serotonin is hypothetically relevant to mood change in premenstrual and postpartum mood disturbances. Women with a history of depression have higher FSH and LH and lower E2 levels and are at risk to begin perimenopause at a younger age. Similarly, the 2:1 female-to-male ratio in depression prevalence may speculatively be related to the rapid changes in hormone levels in menarche. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder is a disorder in which a constellation of symptoms resembling MDD (in some respects) occurs in most menstrual cycles, appearing in the luteal phase and disappearing within a few days of the onset of menses. No definitive abnormalities in estrogen or progesterone levels have been demonstrated in women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder, but decreased serotonin uptake with 

========535========

premenstrual decreases in steroid levels have been correlated with the severity of symptoms in some studies. Progesterone downregulates the estrogen receptor, and it has been suggested that, despite high circulating concentrations of estrogen, the luteal phase is a period of functional estrogen withdrawal, with concomitant effects on the serotonergic system. Recent evidence indicates that the abrupt decline of progesterone and allopregnanolone in the luteal phase results in increased production of the α4 subunit of GABAA and changes in receptor sensitivity that could account for the typical behavioral symptoms noted. This effect is correlated with the insensitivity of the GABA receptor to modulation by the benzodiazepine class of tranquilizers (and hence is anxiogenic). SSRIs, particularly fluoxetine (Prozac), have demonstrated efficacy, and as many as 50 percent of women may respond to fluoxetine administered only in the second half of each cycle. Alprazolam (Xanax), a GABAA agonist, has been found to be more effective than placebo in several studies for the treatment of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. In women with severe symptoms that are not responsive to these treatments, the long-term use of a GnRH agonist to abolish menstrual cycling, with added estrogen–progestin, may be therapeutic. 
Menstrual phase also has been associated with aspects of substance abuse. Although reports vary, craving for cigarettes and tobacco withdrawal appear to vary with menstrual phase (worse in the luteal phase). Women show greater heart rate and pleasurable drug effects after cocaine administration during the follicular phase but report that cocaine improves dysphoric mood during the luteal phase. 
The bulk of the psychological symptoms associated with menopause are actually reported during perimenopause rather than after complete cessation of menses. Reported symptoms include worry, fatigue, crying spells, mood swings, diminished ability to cope, and diminished libido or intensity of orgasm. Estrogen replacement alone may be beneficial, but combination androgen–estrogen replacement may be superior for reinstating energy, a sense of well-being, and libido. In women with an intact uterus, the addition of progestin is necessary to protect against endometrial hyperplasia but can attenuate the beneficial effects of estrogen on mood. 
The postpartum period appears to be a particularly risky time for the emergence or relapse of psychiatric illnesses. Women with bipolar disorder appear to be particularly sensitive to alterations in gonadal steroid level. A high risk of relapse during the postpartum period has been observed and appears to be maintained over subsequent pregnancies; evidence for familial preponderance of the puerperal trigger also exists, suggesting a genetic contribution. During pregnancy a number of mechanism play a role in dampening the response to stress in order to promote maternal care and survival of the offspring. Hormones such as oxytocin and prolactin produce 

========536========

inhibitory effects on the HPA axis, decreased excitatory activity, and a more positive mood state. The reversal of many of these effects may contribute to the vulnerability of women to postpartum psychiatric illnesses. Lactation has the potential to dampen some postpartum changes and has been associated with decreased maternal postpartum depression. 
PREGNENOLONE AND ALLOPREGNANOLONE 
Neuroactive steroids, such as pregnenolone and allopregnanolone (allo), modulate activity at GABAA, NMDA, σ-1, 5-HT3, nicotinic, kainate, oxytocin, and glycine receptors, among others. Pregnenolone is a neurosteroid synthesized from cholesterol in the brain and is partially metabolized to all subsequent steroids. It, and especially its sulfate, pregnenolone sulfate, appear to have memory-enhancing properties in animal studies. Pregnenolone increases the rate and extent of formation of microtubules, important in neuronal plasticity and function. Progesterone counteracts this effect. Pregnenolone sulfate is an excitatory neurosteroid and has GABA inhibitory effects. 
Allo is a neurosteroid derived from progesterone with high concentrations in the CNS. It acts as a GABAA receptor agonist, decreases CRH concentrations in the hypothalamus, and reduces the anxiety evoked by CRH in rats. Testosterone-induced aggression in mice is thought to be mediated by a downregulation in allo, and normalization of allo with progesterone and estrogen prevents aggression. SSRIs increase brain allo levels in rodents. Social isolation also downregulates allo and increases aggression. Fluoxetine reduces both allo downregulation and aggression. CSF levels of allo in humans have been correlated with clinical improvement over the first 8 to 10 weeks of SSRI treatment, an effect that appears to be independent of the serotonin reuptake inhibition. Allo increases in response to ethanol administration and may play a role in ethanol withdrawal through modulation of GABAA. Administration of allo also has been shown to reduce anxiety and hyperlocomotion associated with benzodiazepine withdrawal in animals. Allo is currently unavailable for clinical use, but studies have already commenced on clinical treatment with allo or with related compounds. 
PROLACTIN 
Since its identification in 1970, the anterior pituitary hormone prolactin has been examined as a potential index of dopamine activity, dopamine receptor sensitivity, and antipsychotic drug concentration in studies of CNS function in psychiatric patients and as a correlate of stress responsivity. The secretion of prolactin is under direct inhibitory regulation by dopamine neurons located in the tuberoinfundibular section of the hypothalamus and is, therefore, increased by classical antipsychotic medications. Prolactin 

========537========

also inhibits its own secretion by means of a short-loop feedback circuit to the hypothalamus. In addition, a great number of prolactin-releasing or - modifying factors have been identified, including estrogen, serotonin (particularly through the 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors), norepinephrine, opioids, TRH, T4, histamine, glutamate, cortisol, CRH, and oxytocin, with interaction effects possible. For example, estrogen may promote the serotonin-stimulated release of prolactin. 
Prolactin is primarily involved in reproductive functions. During maturation, prolactin secretion participates in gonadal development, whereas, in adults, prolactin contributes to the regulation of the behavioral aspects of reproduction and infant care, including estrogen-dependent sexual receptivity and breast-feeding. In female rats, prolactin secretion is strongly stimulated with exposure to pups. In women, basal prolactin levels are elevated in the postpartum period before weaning, and prolactin release is stimulated by suckling. Hyperprolactinemia is associated with low testosterone in men and reduced libido in men and women. In rodents, prolactin is increased along with corticosterone in response to such stressful stimuli as immobilization, hypoglycemia, surgery, and cold exposure and may be specifically associated with the use of passive coping in the face of a stressor. Prolactin promotes various stress-related behaviors in rats, depending on the condition, such as increasing object- directed exploration while decreasing other exploration. 
Hyperprolactinemic patients often complain of depression, decreased libido, stress intolerance, anxiety, and increased irritability. These behavioral symptoms usually resolve in parallel with decrements in serum prolactin when surgical or pharmacological treatments are used. In psychotic patients, prolactin concentrations and prolactin-related sexual disturbances have been positively correlated with the severity of tardive dyskinesia. Prolactin levels are also positively correlated with negative symptoms. 
HYPOTHALAMIC–PITUITARY–THYROID AXIS 
Thyroid hormones are involved in the regulation of nearly every organ system, particularly those integral to the metabolism of food and the regulation of temperature, and are responsible for the optimal development and function of all body tissues. Moreover, rates of secretion and metabolism of all other major hormones (cortisol, gonadal hormones, and insulin) and catecholamines depend on thyroid status. The thyroid gland secretes two thyroid hormones: T3 and T4. T3 is the more potent of the two, and most of the T3 circulating in the blood is created by the peripheral metabolism of T4. The brain relies on its own conversion of T4 to T3 rather than on circulating T3. The hypothalamus secretes TRH into the capillaries of the pituitary portal venous system, and the pituitary responds with the 

========538========

hypothalamus 
to 
TSH 
and 
TRH, 
respectively. Finally, 
a 
synthesis and secretion of TSH, which stimulates thyroid cells. Negative feedback regulation occurs when T3 and T4 act in the pituitary and 
inhibit 
corticotropin-release-inhibiting factor (CRIF) has been identified in the rat that inhibits the synthesis and secretion of ACTH. This peptide, prepro- TRH 178–199, is derived from the prohormone TRH and may play a role in integrating the regulation of the HPA and HPT axes. The expression of genes that encode for thyroid hormone receptors, such as TRα and TRβ, plays a major role in the regulation of neuronal differentiation and the action of immediate early genes. As in the case of steroids, thyroid hormones regulate the transcription of a variety of genes through binding to thyroid response elements (TREs) in regulatory sequence elements. 
There is general agreement that central noradrenergic systems are primarily stimulatory to TSH secretion and that central dopamine neurons inhibit TSH release. Thyroid hormones, in turn, are important regulators of 
central 
adrenoceptor 
function, 
generally 
decreasing 
presynaptic 
noradrenaline release and increasing postsynaptic β-adrenergic receptor number. Hypothyroidism is conversely associated with decreased β- receptor number. Changes in serotonin function are also apparent, with T3 increasing 5-HT in frontal cortex and inducing downregulation of 5-HT1A autoreceptors. These changes in neurotransmitter release and receptors in response to thyroid hormones parallel the alteration in α- and β-receptor 
sensitivity 
associated 
with 
pharmacological 
and 
electroconvulsive 
antidepressant treatments and may explain the therapeutic efficacy of 
supplemental 
thyroid 
hormone 
in 
treatment-resistant 
depression. 
Alternatively, therapeutic benefit may be secondary to the alteration of gene expression and a remodeling of synaptic connectivity. In addition to its prime endocrine function, TRH has direct effects on neuronal excitability, behavior, and neurotransmitter regulation, particularly on central cholinergic systems located in the septohippocampal band and on mesolimbic and nigrostriatal dopamine systems. In lower animals, TRH possesses mild stimulant properties. Initial reports of its mood-elevating effects in healthy human subjects led to a number of projects investigating its short-term and long-term antidepressant effects in clinical populations. Despite some initial enthusiasm, the degree of mood alteration does not seem to be great nor is its occurrence reliable. 
Given these observations, it is not surprising that alterations in behavioral function have been observed in patients with primary thyroid gland dysfunction, beginning with the earliest reports in the medical literature. It has been noted that thyroid disorders may induce virtually any psychiatric symptom or syndrome, although regular associations of specific 
thyroid 
commonly 
syndromes and Hyperthyroidism 
is 
conditions 
not associated with 
are 
consistently found. fatigue, irritability, 

========539========

insomnia, anxiety, restlessness, weight loss, and emotional lability; marked impairment in concentration and memory may also be evident. Such states can progress into delirium or mania, or they can be episodic in nature. On occasion, a true psychosis develops, with paranoia being a particularly common presenting feature. In some cases, psychomotor retardation, apathy, and withdrawal rather than agitation and anxiety are the presenting features. Symptoms of mania also have been reported after rapid normalization of thyroid status in hypothyroid individuals and may covary with thyroid level in individuals with episodic endocrine dysfunction. In general, behavioral abnormalities resolve with a normalization of thyroid function and are responsive symptomatically to traditional psychopharmacological regimens. Long-term residual complaints of fatigue, cognitive impairment, and emotional distress have been reported in some individuals even after remission of the precipitating thyroid dysfunction. Caution should be exerted, however, regarding the use of MAOIs or TCA medications in hyperthyroid states because of possible synergistic cardiotoxicity. In several case reports, haloperidol (Haldol) has been linked to increasing thyrotoxicity, and hyperthyroidism has been associated with an enhancement of the neurotoxic effects of antipsychotic medications. 
The psychiatric symptoms of chronic hypothyroidism are generally well recognized. Most classically, fatigue, decreased libido, memory impairment, and irritability are noted, but a true secondary psychotic disorder or dementia-like state also can develop. In milder, subclinical states of hypothyroidism, the absence of gross signs accompanying endocrine dysfunction may result in its being overlooked as a possible cause of a mental disorder. Accordingly, the evaluation of the basal TSH concentration or the TSH response to TRH infusion is necessary to arrive at the proper diagnosis. Figure 1.12–1 illustrates a characteristic physical sign of advanced hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism impairs neurogenesis in the hippocampus, and this impairment is associated with rat models of depression. Thyroid hormone administration corrects the impairment and reverses the depression. 

========540========

FIGURE 1.12–1. Hands of a patient who has hypothyroidism (myxedema), illustrating the swelling of the soft parts, the broadening of the fingers, and their consequent stumpy or pudgy appearance. (From Waterfield RL. Anæmia. In: Douthwaite AH, ed. French’s Index of Differential Diagnosis. 7th ed. Baltimore, MA: Williams & Wilkins; 1954.) 
A blunted response of TSH to TRH infusion has been found in a significant percentage of patients with a variety of disorders, including eating disorders, panic disorder, alcoholism, schizophrenia, and, most commonly, MDD, and probably reflects a transient hyperthyroxinemia. No evidence of TRH hypersecretion has been shown. Large-scale studies suggest that such subjects are in fact euthyroid, and predictive sensitivity of the test is low. Thyroid autoimmunity may play a role in some psychiatric illnesses. Antithyroid antibodies are found more frequently in women with depression than in control subjects and in patients with bipolar disorder and may contribute to relative treatment resistance as well as to postpartum behavioral disturbance. The frequency of thyroid antibodies may also be higher in certain nonpsychiatric diseases with prominent psychiatric symptoms, such as fibromyalgia and rheumatoid arthritis. Patients with major depression also have been found to have low levels of CSF transthyretin, a protein involved in thyroid transport. Basal T3 level has been inversely related to time to episode recurrence, and basal TSH positively correlated with overall severity of depressed mood in an unselected inpatient population. Depressed patients who show an improvement in mood after one night of sleep deprivation also appear to have lower T3 uptake at baseline and greater nocturnal TSH release. Thyroid receptor alterations can produce symptoms of ADHD in animals, and a genetic resistance to thyroid hormone has been associated with 

========541========

ADHD symptoms in humans. Thyroid receptor coactivators also may play a role in increased vulnerability to a number of psychiatric disorders, including depression and psychosis. 
Most antidepressant therapies have some influence on thyroid concentrations at baseline; T4 and T3 concentrations have been correlated with antidepressant response, as have antidepressant-induced changes in thyroid hormones as well as changes induced by ECT. Lithium increases antithyroid antibodies and inhibits iodine uptake into the thyroid, iodination of tyrosine, release of T3 and T4 from the thyroid, and peripheral breakdown of thyroid hormones. It also regulates TR gene expression, blocks the thyroid-stimulating effects of TSH through interference with adenylate cyclase, and may, in certain circumstances, precipitate a rebound thyrotoxicosis. Approximately 30 percent of patients receiving lithium have an elevated TSH level during treatment, and approximately one-sixth of these patients go on to develop frank hypothyroidism. Attention to subtle alteration in thyroid status induced by lithium treatment is important in the clinical evaluation of symptomatic complaints, such as fatigue, memory impairment, and anhedonia; a specific association between lower serum T4 and mood instability during lithium maintenance suggests even subclinical changes may be clinically relevant. Carbamazepine, an anticonvulsant, shown to have antimanic properties akin to lithium also decreases peripheral thyroid hormone concentrations while increasing TSH. Administration of T3 accelerates clinical response to TCAs and is sometimes helpful in patients with treatment-resistant depression, whereas adjunctive T4 contributes to decreasing cycling in patients with rapid- cycling bipolar I disorder. Supraphysiological dosing is sometimes required, with 200 to 500 μg per day being given as an adjunct in treatment-resistant depression and intractable bipolar disorder. Administration of mirtazapine (Kemeron), a mixed action antidepressant, increases free T3 levels and decreases free T4. Higher T3 concentrations predicted improvements in depression in one study. 
PARATHYROID HORMONE 
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) was originally isolated as an endocrine factor having effects on bone, gut, and kidney and contributing to calcium and phosphorus homeostasis. However, the frequent, and often profound, neuropsychiatric changes that can result from altered parathyroid gland function are consistent with other central actions of PTH that have been described in recent years. Hyperparathyroidism can cause lethargy, stupor, coma, depression, delirium, psychosis, primarily visual hallucinations, or anxiety. Hypoparathyroidism can cause cognitive impairment, psychosis, depression, or anxiety by alterations in calcium and magnesium levels. PTH administration can impair the active uptake and release of 

========542========

norepinephrine and dopamine and result in adrenergic-like effects (not blocked by β-adrenergic antagonist), learning and memory problems, and a state of hyperalgesia. 
Lithium treatment can raise the concentrations of serum calcium and may increase PTH over a period of months to years by a direct stimulation of PTH secretion and through a shift in the set point for inhibition of PTH secretion by calcium. When such effects are associated with somatic or behavioral changes, discontinuation of lithium should result in rapid symptomatic improvement. When this does not happen, a parathyroid adenoma is sometimes discovered fortuitously. Primary hyperparathyroidism most commonly occurs secondary to a single parathyroid adenoma, the removal of which almost invariably results in a lysis of behavioral symptoms, regardless of severity or chronicity. Animal studies suggest that long-term lithium administration can stimulate the development of extant parathyroid tumors but does not induce tumors in normal parathyroid tissue. Thus, reinstitution of lithium treatment after surgical removal of the tumor should be possible. 
GROWTH HORMONE 
Somatotropin or GH, a hormone required for normal growth, is synthesized and released by the anterior pituitary gland. Dopamine, serotonin acting at the 5-HT1D receptor, and norepinephrine acting at the α2-adrenergic receptor appear to play a role in its release. GH acutely stimulates lipolysis and ketogenesis, important in the adaptation to stress, and prevents hypoglycemia. Most psychiatric studies of the regulation of GH have used strategies similar to those described for prolactin. Accordingly, studies of GH response to various provocative stimuli, such as to GHRH or psychotherapeutic drugs, have been seen as a means to evaluate central neurotransmitter function. Augmentation of GH secretion in response to GHRH, LH-releasing hormone (LHRH), or TRH in patients with schizophrenia or dementia of the Alzheimer type has been interpreted as reflecting an alteration in catecholamine and, possibly, prostaglandin regulation, which facilitate the secretion of human GH. In general, however, there is a large variation in GH response to GHRH; a blunted response has been variably linked to length of illness, presence of negative symptoms, and platelet MAO activity, but the validity of the conclusions drawn from this test is controversial. 
The stress responsiveness of somatotrophs is well established but species-dependent, with increases in circulating GH noted in humans and inhibition of secretion noted in rodents. In humans, the direction of the GH stress response may depend on the persistence of the stressor. GH appears to be relatively more responsive to exercise and hypoglycemic stress than to psychological stress. However, GH has been reported to increase in 

========543========

response to psychological stress in anxious subjects, perhaps due to hyperactivity of the noradrenergic system. Case reports have documented reversible GH deficiencies and marked growth retardation and delay of puberty secondary to stressful experience. Administration of GH to individuals with GH deficiency has a beneficial effect on cognitive function in addition to its more obvious somatic effects. A significant proportion of adult-onset patients with GH deficiency are depressed, and GH therapy significantly improves their depression scores. Some prepubertal as well as adult patients with diagnoses of MDD show hyposecretion of GHRH during an insulin tolerance test, a deficit that has been interpreted as reflecting alterations in cholinergic and serotonergic mechanisms. Blunted response to 5-HT1D agonists also has been found. Panic disorder patients may have a blunted GH response to clonidine (Catapres), an α2-adrenergic agonist, that does not normalize with antidepressant treatment. A number of GH abnormalities also have been noted in patients with anorexia nervosa, but secondary factors, such as weight loss, may be responsible for such alterations in endocrine release in depression and eating disorders. At least one study has reported that GHRH stimulates food consumption in patients with anorexia nervosa and attenuates elevated food consumption in patients with bulimia. Administration of GH to elderly men results in an increase in lean body mass, but controlled trials have been unable to replicate anecdotal reports of improved mental clarity, muscle strength, or vigor. Recent evidence indicates that a novel GH secretagogue (GHS), ghrelin, may represent an important alternative regulatory influence over food intake and sleep pattern. 
Many GHS can be administered orally, in contrast with GH that must be injected on a daily basis. In addition they may be used to fine-tune body concentrations in a way that daily injections cannot. GHB, a potent GHS, has been used to mimic the physiological secretory pattern of GH and as a way to increase SWS in patients with fibromyalgia and, secondarily, to a reduction in pain and fatigue. The use of the GHS GHB also has been used by bodybuilders as a way of increasing muscle mass, but respiratory depression and sedation and dependence with severe withdrawal effects may result. 
SOMATOSTATIN 
Somatostatin (SRIF) is a hypothalamic tetradecapeptide that is located principally in the nerve endings of the median eminence and in neurosecretory neurons located in the PVN. SRIF inhibits anterior pituitary secretion of ACTH, thyrotropin, GH, and prolactin, alters release of catecholamine neurotransmitters, and stimulates serotonin release. A number of receptor subtypes have been cloned, and receptor-specific ligands have been developed. SRIF was so named because of its action in 

========544========

inhibiting the release of immunoreactive GH, a function that is subserved by SRIF-2 receptors. 
In rats, SRIF delays the extinction of active avoidance behavior and antagonizes amnesia induced by electric shock. Alterations in the concentration of SRIF have been associated with a number of conditions in which cognitive dysfunction is present, including Huntington disease, Parkinson disease, multiple sclerosis, and Alzheimer disease. Decreases in SRIF are highly correlated with decreases in AChE, suggesting a close relationship between the cholinergic and somatostatinergic systems. Decreased concentrations of SRIF in the CSF are inconsistently found in patients with depression, and central injection of SRIF in rats causes decreased slow wave and REM sleep, altered appetite and locomotor activity, impaired cognition, and decreased sensitivity to pain. Early stressful experiences also have been related to sustained elevations of CRH and somatostatin in the CSF of adult primates. Altered somatostatin concentrations have been reported in a number of other illnesses and with treatment, but the physiological relevance of these changes is still unclear. 
ARGININE VASOPRESSIN 
AVP (or antidiuretic hormone [ADH]) is a posterior pituitary hormone that maintains plasma osmolarity through the regulation of renal water excretion and that stimulates hepatic glycogenolysis. AVP release is triggered by pain, emotional stress, dehydration, increased plasma osmolarity, or decreases in blood volume and acts synergistically with CRH to control ACTH release. AVP potentiates the stimulatory effect of CRF. An AVP receptor antagonist blocks ACTH release, norepinephrine release, and hyperthermic response to stress and attenuates some stress-related behaviors. AVP receptor blockade does not impair motor or cognitive processes or produce tolerance, as do many other anxiolytics. 
Animal and normal human studies of AVP administration (or longer- acting synthetic analog compounds) have indicated that the hormone may enhance the consolidation and retrieval of memory, particularly that associated with aversive learning. AVP has been shown to prevent the loss of tolerance to the incoordinating, sedative-hypnotic, and hypothermic effects of alcohol after cessation of ingestion and to delay the loss of sexual behavior after castration. 
Altered AVP function has been reported in depression and in eating disorders. Anorexic and bulimic patients show hypersecretion of centrally directed AVP, and patients with bulimia nervosa or depression may have an attenuated AVP response to hypertonic saline. Vasopressin delays the extinction of behaviors acquired during aversive conditioning and may be related to obsessional preoccupation with the aversive consequences of eating and weight gain. An inverse relationship between AVP concentration and motor activity in depression and an increased number of vasopressin 

========545========

and oxytocin neurons also have been reported in the hypothalamus of depressed patients. Although dexamethasone suppression of ACTH and cortisol release is attenuated in depressed patients, suppression of ACTH and cortisol release in response to vasopressin is not. 
Profound alterations in fluid ingestion and excretion have been observed in psychiatric patients. Polydipsia occurs in 10 to 15 percent of hospitalized psychiatric patients and is unrelated to diagnosis; in many cases, the syndrome is secondary to inappropriate secretion of AVP, which occurs as a feature of the altered behavioral state itself and resolves with treatment or, conversely, is precipitated by a variety of antidepressant or antipsychotic agents. In contrast, fluoxetine treatment of depression decreases the CSF vasopressin levels. Alprazolam, an inhibitor of CRH secretion, inhibits the vasopressin-stimulated release of ACTH and cortisol. 
Several subtypes of AVP receptors and been discovered, including V1aR, V1bR, and V2R. V1aR knock-out (KO) mice show impairments in spatial learning, and both V1aR and V1bR KO mice show impairments in prepulse inhibition and social behavior. AVP V1aR KO mice have reduced social recognition. With transgenic technology, this gene, when introduced into the nonmonogamous mouse, increased a behavior associated with monogamy. AVP antagonists prevent bonding in the monogamous prairie vole. Animal studies show that centrally released AVP produces anxiogenic and depression-like actions, including generating passive coping strategies in stressful situations. That AVP modulates the stress response is shown by the ability of V1a/b receptor antagonist to normalize the usually abnormal dexamethasone–CRH test in rats bred for high anxiety (HAB). Serotonin increases the release of AVP, but SSRIs reduce AVP secretion or normalize AVP overactivity in HAB rats, resulting in the normalization of the dexamethasone–CRH test and less depression-like behavior in response to stress. Animal studies of the role of AVP in social behavior suggest that receptor variations may be involved in such disorders as schizophrenia and autism. In fact, several studies have found an association between an AVP receptor gene and autism and social behavior in a nonclinical population. 
OXYTOCIN 
Oxytocin is a posterior pituitary hormone that is involved in osmoregulation, the milk ejection reflex, food intake, and female maternal and sexual behaviors and has many effects reciprocal to those of vasopressin. Convergent evidence, using a range of methodologies, indicates that oxytocin inhibits food and sodium intake. Oxytocin binding in the hypothalamus is increased by estrogen and glucocorticoids and in estrogen-primed women. Oxytocin also can act as a neuromodulator of limbic dopamine concentrations and thus may be involved in the adaptation to substances of abuse, and it can act as a mediator of the effect 

========546========

of CRH on ACTH. Oxytocin has anxiolytic activity. 
Many of oxytocin’s behavioral effects are affiliative, and it promotes a variety of reproductive (grooming, arousal, lordosis, orgasm, nesting, and birthing) and maternal behaviors (breast-feeding and mother–infant bonding). Infusion of oxytocin in female subjects of monogamous species facilitates pair bonding in the absence of mating, and administration of an oxytocin antagonist prevents pair bonding. It has been called the amnestic neuropeptide owing to its ability to attenuate memory consolidation and retrieval. Patients with autism and anorexia have been reported to have reduced levels of oxytocin. Autistic children also do not show the expected increase in oxytocin with age. In adults with autism, oxytocin infusion reduces repetitive behaviors. In one animal study, chronic administration of phencyclidine (PCP), which lowers hypothalamic oxytocin, also decreased social interaction. An association between an oxytocin receptor gene and autism has recently been identified. Oxytocin interacts with the mesolimbic dopamine system and is believed to facilitate the acquisition of drug use disorders, particularly of some of the “party drugs,” such as MDMA and GHB, which are often used to promote social behavior. 
NEUROPEPTIDE Y 
NPY is closely linked with stress response and with the action of a number of steroid hormones. NPY is widely distributed throughout the CNS and is one of the most conserved peptides in evolution, suggesting an important role in the regulation of basic physiological function, including learning and memory. NPY and NPY-related peptide bind to at least five receptors, which are widely distributed but relatively concentrated in the hypothalamus, the hippocampus, and several other limbic regions. NPY is synthesized in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus. Immunoreactive NPY is found in the serotonin-containing raphe nucleus, and it has been implicated in the modulation of emotional processing. Marijuana use appears to elevate the expression of NPY-1 receptor mRNA levels, perhaps explaining some of the drug’s effects. NPY has been found to increase feeding, particularly carbohydrate ingestion, and to counteract leptin effects in a variety of animal models. It has a mutually inhibitory relationship with insulin, and its release is stimulated by stress and corticosteroids and associated with norepinephrine release. 
NPY has been studied for its potential anxiolytic, antinociceptive, antihypertensive, and memory-enhancing effects and for a possible role in seizure disorder, schizophrenia, and depression. Treatments for depression, such as some antidepressants, lithium (Eskalith), and ECT, increase NPY concentrations in a number of brain areas in rats, while significantly low levels of NPY have been found in the temporal cortices of patients with schizophrenia. Greater NPY release during stress is associated with less psychological distress in humans and the modulation 

========547========

of the activity of GABAergic neurons. Neuroactive steroids in turn regulate NPY transmission. NPY appears to influence alcohol consumption and alcohol and morphine withdrawal effects. Reduced levels of NPY are found in discrete brain regions of alcohol-preferring rats, and polymorphisms of the NPY gene are associated with alcohol dependence and with alcohol withdrawal seizures in humans. Polymorphisms in the genes for the NPY peptide and for a promoter region also have been found to be associated with depression in some individuals. 
GALANIN 
Galanin is an inhibitory peptide that is stimulated in a coordinated fashion with gonadal steroid release. Its documented actions include increased release of GH and inhibition of insulin release, locus coeruleus noradrenergic firing, and acetylcholine release as well as impairment of memory and the mediation of some emotional responses. Studies are underway using galanin receptor agonists and antagonists and galanin receptor KO mice to explore its role in mediating anxiety- and depression- related behavior and in decreasing opiate withdrawal. 
INSULIN 
Insulin is a protein hormone secreted by the β cells of the pancreas in response to elevations of glucose and amino acids; insulin receptors occur in high density in the hippocampus and are believed to help neurons to metabolize glucose by controlling the transport across cell membranes. Some atypical antipsychotics impair response to insulin and raise blood glucose, increasing the risk of developing diabetes (see Metabolic Syndrome). Psychotic stress itself may impair insulin sensitivity. Those antidepressants that predominantly increase catecholamine activity, such as many of the TCAs, also reduce sensitivity to insulin. Those that increase serotonergic function, such as the SSRIs, increase sensitivity to insulin and are preferred in the treatment of depression comorbid with diabetes. However, insulin may play a more active role in psychiatric symptoms as increasing evidence indicates that insulin may be integrally involved in learning, memory, and mood. Depression is frequent in patients with diabetes, as are indices of impaired hormonal response to stress, but it is not known whether these findings represent direct effects of the disease or are secondary, nonspecific effects. Higher fasting insulin levels also have been associated with better psychopathology scores in schizophrenic patients. 
LEPTIN 
Leptin is a protein hormone synthesized and secreted in a pulsatile fashion by adipose tissue and involved in the regulation of food intake. Obesity is 

========548========

associated with leptin resistance, principally its metabolic actions, because sympathetic effects are preserved. Leptin also affects the HPG axis, inhibits insulin-induced steroidogenesis and human chorionic gonadotropin- induced testosterone secretion, and may play a role in menstruation, pregnancy, lactation, puberty, and amenorrhea due to weight loss in anorexia nervosa. Leptin stimulates hematopoiesis, T-cell activation, phagocytosis, and cytokine production and decreases susceptibility to infection. Mediators of leptin action include orexigenic neuropeptides, such as NPY, galanin and galanin-like peptide, and melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), and anorexigenic neuropeptides, such as CRH and α- MSH hormone. Weight gain produced by some atypical antipsychotics may be mediated in part through increases in leptin. Patients with major depression have lower leptin levels, and these levels are inversely correlated with depression severity. However, higher leptin levels have been found in subjects exposed to trauma with hyperarousal, and these levels are related to hypervigilance. Because these relationships were correlations, the causal relationship is not known. Increased leptin may be an attempt at adaptation, as postulated for changes in opioids and neuroactive steroids in PTSD. 
CHOLECYSTOKININ 
CCK is a peptide neurotransmitter originally isolated from the gut. In addition to its presence in pancreas and the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, CCK is found in high concentrations in the cerebral cortex, limbic system, and hypothalamus. CCK is involved in the regulation of such behavioral functions as inhibition of intake of solid and liquid food, production of satiety, pain relief (probably from modulation of the endogenous opioid system), cardiovascular and respiratory function, neurotoxicity and seizures, sexual and reproductive behaviors, and memory. Of the two identified receptor subtypes, CCK type A (CCK-A) is found primarily in the periphery and in some discrete brain areas, whereas CCK type B (CCK-B) is plentiful in the brain. The primary form of CCK, CCK-8S (a sulfated octapeptide), coexists with dopamine in the VTA and substantia nigra, and its interactions with dopamine are context- and location-specific. CCK stimulates the synthesis of NGF and plays a neuroprotective role. CCK also modulates HPA activity. 
Of particular interest to psychiatry is the colocalization of CCK with dopamine in mesolimbic and mesocortical, but not in nigrostriatal, systems. CCK contributes to the modulation of dopamine-mediated behavior and might be dysregulated in psychiatric syndromes thought to involve altered dopamine transmission. CCK-A receptor antagonists have been proposed for the treatment of schizophrenia, and initial evidence suggests that CCK agonists may be useful for decreasing the severity of parkinsonian symptoms. Cerulein, a mixed CCK-A and CCK-B agonist, has 

========549========

weak, neuroleptic-like effects on prepulse inhibition in schizophrenic patients. Evidence is stronger for a role of CCK-B receptor antagonists in the treatment of anxiety. CCK has anxiogenic effects in some animal models, and several small-scale human studies have demonstrated that the administration of CCK-4 or pentagastrin can induce panic attacks and can increase neurosteroid release in a significant percentage of healthy volunteers as well as in anxiety disorder patients, even in the absence of arousal or environmental stress. Panic attacks in subjects with preexisting panic disorder can be elicited at doses of CCK-4 that do not reliably induce panic in healthy subjects, indicating enhanced sensitivity. Not only can selective CCK-B antagonists completely abolish the anxiogenic effects of CCK-4, but in an animal model of anxiety used to evaluate the efficacy of benzodiazepines, CCK-B antagonists also demonstrated independent anxiolytic properties. However, CCK overactivity may be involved in submissive behavior in animal models, and CCK receptor expression is higher in suicide victims. 
Modulation of mesolimbic dopamine-related behavior, including exploratory and rewarded behaviors may underlie CCK’s effects on substance use. Central CCK activity has been linked with preference for drugs of abuse, such as cocaine or alcohol, and polymorphisms of the CCK gene may be one of the risk factors for smoking. This suggests a potential role for CCK receptor antagonists in the treatment of drug dependence. 
GASTRIN AND GASTRIN-RELEASING PEPTIDE 
Gastrin is a peptide hormone closely related to CCK that stimulates the secretion of gastric acid by the stomach. Pentagastrin is a synthetic polypeptide with effects similar to those of gastrin. It is a CCK agonist and produces anxiety and panic in patients with anxiety disorders and to a lesser extent in those without anxiety disorders. It increases ACTH and cortisol release. Gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP), as its name implies, stimulates gastrin release but has a number of other actions, including interacting with GABA, dopamine, and GRs. GRP appears to enhance memory storage, and a GRP receptor antagonist impairs emotionally motivated memory tasks in rats. GRP-receptor-deficient mice show increased locomotor activity and changes in social behavior. 
NEUROTENSIN 
Neurotensin is a tridecapeptide that appears to play a role in neuroendocrine regulation and coordination as a signaling molecule. Gonadal and adrenal steroids and thyroid hormones alter neurotensin levels in the hypothalamus, preoptic area, and arcuate nucleus. Neurotensin has a close neuroanatomical relation with serotonin and dopaminergic pathways and is involved in the control of anterior pituitary activity, stimulating the release of prolactin and TSH, as well as in the 

========550========

regulation of a subpopulation of serotonergic neurons in the dorsal raphe and frontal cortex and GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons. Stimulation of serotonin neurons may be responsible for its analgesic effects and reduction of stress response, whereas the effects on dopamine suggest a possible antipsychotic role. Subgroups of drug-free schizophrenic patients have low neurotensin CSF concentrations and altered neurotensin receptor binding in the entorhinal cortex. Psychotogenic drugs (e.g., methamphetamine) inhibit the release of striatal neurotensin via an inhibitory effect of the dopamine type 1 (D1) receptor. Most antipsychotic drugs increase neurotensin concentrations in the nucleus accumbens and caudate nucleus; schizophrenic patients with decreased CSF neurotensin show an increase compared to baseline values after antipsychotic drug treatment and clinical improvement. Because of neurotensin’s association with the nigrostriatal dopamine and the serotonin systems, it is suspected of playing a role in movement disorders caused by antipsychotic drugs. Central administration of neurotensin in rats produces motor effects seen in animal models of parkinsonian and dystonic reactions (catalepsy) and tardive dyskinesia. Neurotensin may exert an antipsychotic action through intramembrane receptor interactions that reduce affinity of the dopamine type 2 (D2) agonist binding site. Overexpression of neurotensin 1 receptors in rats results in decreased activation of the mesolimbic dopamine system, similar to that produced by atypical antipsychotics but without changing prepulse inhibition or locomotor behavior, as atypical antipsychotic drugs do. This suggests that neurotensin receptor agonists may be candidates for the treatment of psychosis and attenuate dopamine-induced motor behaviors. 
An involvement in the development of drug dependence also has been hypothesized. Blocking the effects of neurotensin with antiserum or a receptor antagonist enhances dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens, and neurotensin itself blocks stimulant-induced motor activity. However, doses that block hyperlocomotion do not attenuate the self-administration of cocaine and even enhance conditioned place preference, an animal model of rewarding effects. Neurotensin’s modulating effects on dopamine activity may depend on stimulus intensity, enhancing the rewarding properties of a subthreshold stimulus from intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS), as do psychostimulants, but decreasing maximal stimulation rate, as do antipsychotic drugs. Acute administration of stimulants increases neurotensin in the nucleus accumbens, but with chronic administration, levels return to normal. Ibogaine, a hallucinogen used in indigenous religious ceremonies, has been shown to interrupt cocaine and methamphetamine abuse in patients and may act similarly to ICSS, increasing neurotensin concentrations in the nucleus accumbens when given alone but attenuating cocaine-induced increases in neurotensin. Neurotensin also mimics many of the effects of alcohol, chronic alcohol 

========551========

downregulates neurotensin receptors, and lower concentrations of neurotensin have been found in the frontal cortices of alcohol-preferring rats. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS: ENDOCRINE VARIABLES IN THE DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS 
Although it is clear that alterations in endocrine regulation are involved in the pathophysiology and treatment responses of many psychiatric disorders, incorporating these findings into clinical diagnostic assessment and decision making remains problematic. Questions about state/trait differences and the role of confounding variables plague nearly all observations, and most of the findings to date are based on small numbers of subjects studied under experimental conditions. Large-scale longitudinal or cost/effectiveness studies are rare, despite indications that baseline alterations in glucocorticoid regulation and thyroid status (two of the best studied abnormalities) may actually be useful in subtyping psychiatric disorders and in prediction of outcome. Although the dexamethasone- suppression test (DST) was perhaps prematurely put forward as a diagnostic aid, the fact remains that alterations in HPA/stress regulation underlie a number of psychiatric diagnoses and may serve as complementary independent variables in defining treatment response and course of illness to the classical behavioral categories that have thus far defined current practice. Studying genetic polymorphisms in factors regulating hormonal response may help us better understand the influence of hormonal variability on the illness and also possible underlying differences in the nature of the illness reflected in these genetic subtypes. Incorporation of endocrine variables into the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) is premature, but routine assessment of endocrine status in clinical trials and epidemiologic surveys is long overdue. Incorporation of biological variables into psychiatric diagnosis and treatment decision-making requires prospective proof of concept studies that unequivocally demonstrate the clinical superiority of such assessments over that of behavioral variables alone. Unfortunately no such data exist at the present time. 
REFERENCES 
Amin Z, Mason GF, Cavus I, Krystal JH, Rothman DL. The interaction of neuroactive steroids and GABA in the development of neuropsychiatric disorders in women. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2006;84:635. 
Baribeau DA, Anagnostou E. Oxytocin and vasopressin: linking pituitary neuropeptides and their receptors to social neurocircuits. Front Neurosci. 2015;9:335. Review. 
Boules M, Shaw A, Fredrickson P, Richelson E. Neurotensin agonists: potential in the treatment of schizophrenia. CNS Drugs. 2007;21:13. 

========552========

Caceda R, Kinkead B, Nemeroff CB. Neurotensin: role in psychiatric and neurological diseases. Peptides. 2006;27:2385. 
Celec P, Ostatníková D, Hodosy J. On the effects of testosterone on brain behavioral functions. Front Neurosci. 2015;9:12. 
Champagne FA. Epigenetic mechanisms and the transgenerational effects of maternal care. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2008;29(3):386–397. 
*Chrousos GP, Kino T. Glucocorticoid action networks and complex psychiatric and/or somatic disorders. Stress. 2007;10:213. 
Dubrovsky B. Neurosteroids, neuroactive steroids, and symptoms of affective disorders. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2006;84:644. 
Duval F, Mokrani MC, Ortiz JA, Schulz P, Champeval C. Neuroendocrine predictors of the evolution of depression. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2005;7:273. 
Faron-Górecka A, Kuśmider M, Solich J, et al. Involvement of prolactin and somatostatin depression and the mechanism of action of antidepressant drugs. Pharmacol Rep. 2013;65(6):1640–1646. Review. 
Fliers E, Alkemade A, Wiersinga WM, Swaab DF. Hypothalamic thyroid hormone feedback in health and disease. Prog Brain Res. 2006;153:189. 
Frye CA. Progestins influence motivation, reward, conditioning, stress, and/or response to drugs of abuse. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2007;86:209. 
Genazzani AR, Pluchino N, Luisi S, Luisi M. Estrogen, cognition and female aging. Hum Reprod Update. 2007;13:175. 
Heinrichs M, Gaab J. Neuroendocrine mechanisms of stress and social interaction: implications for mental disorders. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2007;20:158. 
Hervieu GJ. Further insights into the neurobiology of melanin-concentrating hormone in energy and mood balances. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2006;10:211. 
Hofmann HA. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone signaling in behavioral plasticity. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2006;16:343. 
Holsboer F, Ising M. Central CRH system in depression and anxiety—evidence from clinical studies with CRH1 receptor antagonists. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008;583(2–3):350–357. Karl T, Herzog H. Behavioral profiling of NPY in aggression and neuropsychiatric diseases. Peptides. 2007;28:326. 
Kehne JH. The CRF1 receptor, a novel target for the treatment of depression, anxiety, and stress- related disorders. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2007;6:163. 
Korol DL, Pisani SL. Estrogens and cognition: friends or foes? An evaluation of the opposing effects of estrogens on learning and memory. Horm Behav. 2015;74:105–115. Review. Lifschytz T, Segman R, Shalom G, Lerer B, Gur E. Basic mechanisms of augmentation of antidepressant effects with thyroid hormone. Curr Drug Targets. 2006;7:203. 
McEwen BS, Bowles NP, Gray JD, et al. Mechanisms of stress in the brain. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18(10):1353–1363. Review. 
Miller GE, Chen E, Zhou ES. If it goes up, must it come down? Chronic stress and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis in humans. Psychol Bull. 2007;133:25. 
Nishino S. The hypothalamic peptidergic system, hypocretin/orexin and vigilance control. Neuropeptides. 2007;41:117. 

========553========

Olza-Fernández I, Marín Gabriel MA, Gil-Sanchez A, Garcia-Segura LM, Arevalo MA. Neuroendocrinology of childbirth and mother-child attachment: the basis of an etiopathogenic model of perinatal neurobiological disorders. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2014;35(4):459–472. Review. 
Overli O, Sorensen C, Pulman KG, Pottinger TG, Korzan W. Evolutionary background for stress- coping styles: relationships between physiological, behavioral, and cognitive traits in non- mammalian vertebrates. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2007;31:396. 
*Phillips DI. Programming of the stress response: a fundamental mechanism underlying the long-term effects of the fetal environment? J Intern Med. 2007;261:453. 
Rosell DR, Siever LJ. The neurobiology of aggression and violence. CNS Spectr. 2015;20(3):254– 279. Review. 
Schatzberg AF, Lindley S. Glucocorticoid antagonists in neuropsychotic disorders. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008;583(2–3):358–364. 
Schneider JE. Metabolic and hormonal control of the desire for food and sex: implications for obesity and eating disorders. Horm Behav. 2006;50:562. 
Shamlian NT, Cole MG. Androgen treatment of depressive symptoms in older men: a systematic review of feasibility and effectiveness. Can J Psychiatry. 2006;51:295. 
Slattery DA, Neumann ID. No stress please! Mechanisms of stress hyporesponsiveness of the maternal brain. J Physiol. 2008;586(2):377–385. 
Sodersten P, Bergh C, Zandian M. Psychoneuroendocrinology of anorexia nervosa. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2006;31:1149. 
*Strous RD, Maayan R, Weizman A. The relevance of Neurosteroids to clinical psychiatry: from the laboratory to the bedside. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2006;16:155. 
Wrenn CC, Holmes A. The role of galanin in modulating stress-related neural pathways. Drug News Perspect. 2006;19:461. 
▲ 1.13 Immune System and Central Nervous System Interactions 
CHARLES L. RAISON, M.D., REBECCA G. REED, PH.D., GRAHAM A.W. ROOK, B.CHIR., M.D., AND ANDREW H. MILLER, M.D. 
Interactions between the immune system and the CNS play a critical role in the maintenance of bodily homeostasis and the development of diseases, including psychiatric disease. Alterations in CNS function brought about by a variety of stressors have been shown to influence both the immune system and diseases that involve the immune system. Moreover, many of the relevant hormonal and neurotransmitter pathways that mediate these effects have been elucidated. With this has come an increased understanding of the central role that cytokines, which derive from immune cells and microglia, play in brain–immune interactions. Indeed, interest in the role of cytokines and their signaling pathways in the various psychiatric diseases has exploded in recent years and with this has come an expansion of research into the role of infectious and autoimmune diseases 

========554========

in the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. Most recently, a previously unrecognized lymphatic system that drains the brain—and directly connects the CNS with peripheral immunity—highlights the fact that the central CNS and immunity are really best understood as different facets of a larger system evolved to enhance survival and reproduction. Taken together, these findings highlight the importance of interdisciplinary efforts involving the neurosciences and immunology for gaining new insights into the etiology of psychiatric syndromes. 
OVERVIEW OF IMMUNE SYSTEM 
The immune system has the capacity to protect the body from the invasion of foreign pathogens, such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites. In addition, the immune system can detect and eliminate cells that have become neoplastically transformed. Finally, it has emerged recently that the immune system surveys, controls, and maintains the various symbiotic and commensal microbiota, notably in the gut. These functions are accomplished through highly specific receptors on immune cells for molecules derived from invading organisms and a rich intercellular communication network that involves direct cell-to-cell interactions and signaling between cells of the immune system by soluble factors called cytokines. The body’s absolute dependence on the efficient functioning of the immune system is illustrated by the less than 1-year survival rate of untreated infants born with severe combined immunodeficiency disease and the devastating opportunistic infections and cancers that arise during untreated AIDS. 
Cells and Tissues 
The immune system must be able to survey all tissues of the body for the presence of infectious agents or neoplastic cells and to mobilize its effector components to specific sites in the body where infectious agents may invade. Therefore, an important requirement of the immune system is that it be systemic and mobile. Cells of hematopoietic origin largely accomplish this function. Like all other blood cells, immune cells are derived from hematopoietic precursor stem cells, which in the adult originate in the bone marrow. The stem cells are pluripotent and capable of differentiating into any one of the various mature hematopoietic cells. There are two major paths of immune cell differentiation that are regulated in part by cytokines and other factors (Fig. 1.13–1). The lymphoid pathway leads to the formation of the mature lymphocytes, B cells, T cells, and natural killer (NK) cells, and the myeloid path of differentiation leads to other cells that participate in the immune response, including monocytes and granulocytes, which include neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils. Monocytes and basophils may further differentiate into macrophages and 

========555========

mast cells, respectively, which take up residence in tissues throughout the body. 
Lymphocyte maturation occurs in primary immune tissues. In humans, the bone marrow serves as the primary site for B-cell maturation, and the thymus is the primary site for T-cell maturation. An important part of the maturation process is the screening out of cells that are reactive to the body’s own constituents (self-reactive). After maturation, lymphocytes exit the primary immune tissues and circulate through the bloodstream and the lymphatic system into and out of the secondary immune tissues, including the spleen and widely distributed lymph nodes. Secondary immune tissues provide a venue for interactions between different immune cells and circulating pathogens. 
Innate and Adaptive Immunity 
The immune system is often divided on a functional basis into two separate categories: innate or natural immunity and adaptive or acquired immunity (Table 1.13–1). The components of innate immunity act rapidly and in a relatively nonspecific manner against pathogens or infected cells and are evolutionarily more primitive than the specialized T and B lymphocytes that mediate acquired immunity. Operationally, however, the two modes of immunity interact and cooperate. 
Innate Immunity 
The cells mediating innate immunity are maintained at a constant background level of activation, partly by exposure to microbial components taken in from the gut, so they do not require prior activation and/or specific recognition of invading pathogens to be functional. They provide an important first line of defense against infectious agents during the early stages of an immune response. Mononuclear phagocytic cells and NK cells are examples of immune cells that mediate innate immunity. Mononuclear phagocytic cells, such as macrophages, microglia (the macrophage equivalent in the brain), dendritic cells, reticular cells, and certain endothelial cells of lymphoid organs are all part of the reticuloendothelial system, which surveys circulating antigen and mobilizes an immune response upon its discovery. These cells recognize extracellular pathogens (e.g., bacteria and parasites) through relatively crude pattern recognition molecules (e.g., toll-like receptors [TLRs]) and in some cases destroy these pathogens by engulfing and degrading them (Fig. 1.13–2). In addition to recognizing pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), TLRs and other innate immune receptors can be activated by noninfectious molecules, including heat-shock proteins, high-mobility group box 1, ATP and DNA, that collectively have come to be known as damage-associated (or danger-associated) molecular pattern molecules (DAMPs). Recent 

========556========

studies suggest that DAMPs may be especially relevant for the ability of psychological stress to activate inflammation in the absence of an infectious 
stimulus. 
FIGURE 1.13–1. Hematopoietic tree. The development of different lineages of blood cells is depicted in this hematopoietic tree. CFU, colony forming unit. (From Abbas AK, Lichtman AH, Pober JS. Cellular and Molecular Immunology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 
2000, with permission.) 
Table 1.13–1. 
Divisions of the Immune System: Innate versus Acquired 
Physicochemical 
barriers Cells 
Innate 
Skin, mucous membranes 
Phagocytes (macrophages, 
neutrophils, and natural killer 
cells) 
Soluble mediators that 
affect other cells Memory 
Circulating molecules 
Macrophage-derived cytokines, i.e., 
IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α, IFN-α None 
Complement, acute-phase reactants 
Acquired 
Cutaneous and mucosal immune 
systems 
Lymphocytes (B and T cells) 
Lymphocyte-derived cytokines, i.e., IL- 
2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ Yes 
Antibodies 
IL, interleukin; IFN, interferon; TNF, tumor necrosis factor. 

========557========

FIGURE 1.13–2. Innate immunity. Local and systemic responses to cytokine release secondary to tissue injury/infection. Locally cytokines act on endothelial and tissue stromal cells. Tissue stromal cells produce chemotactic factors, recruiting other immune cells to the site of injury. The endothelial cells produce adhesion molecules, enhancing immune cell margination and diapedesis. In the brain, proinflammatory cytokines—including interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α)—activate the hypothalamic–pituitary– adrenal (HPA) axis and induce behavioral changes that subserve the metabolic demands of fever and inflammation. The proinflammatory cytokines also induce the liver to produce acute phase proteins. CAM, cellular adhesion molecule; IFN, interferon; NF-κB, nuclear factor κB; PGE, prostaglandin E; TLR, toll-like receptor. (From Cowles MK, Miller AH. Stress, cytokines and depressive illness. In: Squire LR, ed. The New Encyclopedia of Neuroscience. Oxford: Academic Press; 2008.) 
Table 1.13–2. 
Cytokine Mediators of Innate Immunity 
Cytokine Source Principal Cell Targets and Biological Effects Tumor Macrophages, T cells Endothelial cells: activation (inflammation, coagulation) 

========558========

necrosis factor (TNF) 
Interleukin-1 Macrophages, 
(IL-1) endothelial cells, 
some epithelial cells Chemokines Macrophages, 
endothelial cells, T 
cells, fibroblasts, 
platelets Interleukin-12 Macrophages, dendritic 
(IL-12) cells 
Neutrophils: activation 
Hypothalamus: fever 
Liver: synthesis of acute-phase proteins 
Muscle, fat: catabolism (cachexia) 
Many cell types: apoptosis 
Endothelial cells: activation (inflammation, coagulation) Hypothalamus: fever 
Liver: synthesis of acute-phase proteins 
Leukocytes: chemotaxis, activation; migration into tissues 
T cells: Th1 differentiation 
Type 1 IFNs IFN-α: macrophages 
(IFN-α, IFN- 
β) 
IFN-β: fibroblasts Interleukin-10 Macrophages, T cells 
(IL-10) (mainly Th2) 
NK cells and T cells: IFN-γ synthesis, increased cytolytic 
activity 
All cells: antiviral state, increased class I major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) expression 
Interleukin-6 
(IL-6) 
Macrophages, 
endothelial cells, T 
cells 
NK cells: activation 
Macrophages, dendritic cells: inhibition of Th1 cell 
production of IFN-γ and IL-2 and expression of 
costimulators and class II MHC molecules NF-κB and TNF-α: inhibition 
Liver: synthesis of acute-phase proteins 
Interleukin-15 Macrophages, others 
(IL-15) 
B cells: proliferation of antibody-producing cells NK cells: proliferation 
Interleukin-18 Macrophages 
(IL-18) 
T cells: proliferation (memory CD8+ cells) NK cells and T cells: IFN-γ synthesis 
From Abbas AK, Lichtman AH, Pober JS. Cellular and Molecular Immunology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2007, with permission. 
Important intracellular signaling molecules that are triggered by TLRs (as well as a number of cytokines) include NF-κB and the MAPKs including p38 MAPK. NF-κB and MAPK play a key role in initiating the innate immune inflammatory response. Activated mononuclear phagocytes release type I interferons (e.g., IFN-α), which have direct antiviral properties, and proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF, interleukin (IL)-1, and IL-6. TNF is the principal mediator of the response to gram- negative bacteria and is one of the earliest cytokines released in the proinflammatory cascade that includes IL-1 followed by IL-6. TNF and IL-1 are endogenous pyrogens capable of inducing fever by increasing the 

========559========

synthesis of prostaglandins by cytokine-stimulated hypothalamic cells. TNF also leads to cachexia, characterized by wasting of muscle cells, in part secondary to appetite suppression. 
The combination of liver-derived plasma proteins induced by TNF and IL-1 with those induced by IL-6 constitutes the acute-phase response (Fig. 1.13–2). The acute-phase response is designed to limit tissue damage, isolate, and destroy invading pathogens, and set repair functions in motion. These objectives are achieved by rapid changes in plasma protein composition characterized by increases in acute-phase reactants, including C-reactive protein (CRP) (which coats bacteria to facilitate phagocytosis- opsonization), macroglobulin, and other antiproteases (which neutralize tissue destructive proteases), and the clotting protein fibrinogen. Albumin and transferrin (the iron transport protein) decline during the acute-phase response and are therefore called negative acute-phase reactants. During the acute-phase response, inflammatory cytokines also coordinate the systemic response to infection, having potent effects on the neuroendocrine system (especially the HPA axis) and the CNS where they mediate many symptoms of illness, including fever, loss of appetite, social withdrawal, and sleep changes. Innate immune responses can also be triggered in response to cellular constituents that are released as a consequence of cell death or destruction (as may occur during trauma or ischemia). 
Complement factor proteins, which are produced by the liver, represent another important humoral component of the innate immune response. These functionally linked proteins interact with one another in a highly regulated manner and subserve many of the effector functions of the immune system, including cell lysis, opsonization, activation of inflammation by attracting inflammatory cells (chemotaxis), stimulation of immune cells to release chemical mediators of inflammation, and neutralization of antigen–antibody complexes that can damage tissues. 
NK cells are also an important component of innate immunity. These cells can destroy virally infected cells by binding to them and releasing cytolytic factors, including perforin. NK cells also have the ability to recognize and destroy neoplastically transformed host cells, especially those of hematopoietic origin, thus providing protection against some cancers. 
Adaptive Immunity 
T and B lymphocytes are the crowning achievement of the evolution of immune cell specialization. These cells account for the diversity, specificity, and adaptive functionality within the immune system. An effective acquired immune response includes a recognition phase, an activation phase, and an effector phase of antigen elimination. 
During the recognition phase, the presence of an infectious agent, antigen, or neoplastically transformed cell is detected. This is achieved 

========560========

through specialized receptors for antigens on the surfaces of B and T lymphocytes. The receptors for an antigen on a particular B or T cell are identical and unique to that cell and its descendants (clones). A family of lymphocytes with identical antigen receptor specificity is called a clonal line. Diversity in antigen recognition is derived from the vast number of different B- and T-cell clonal lines present in each individual. When an antigen is detected, the corresponding clone is selected and activated. 
The activation phase includes the proliferation and mobilization of the immune cells relevant to the eradication of the infectious agent. The binding of foreign antigens by B and T cells is usually not sufficient to produce cell activation; an accessory signal must also be provided. Important accessory signals are generated by a group of cytokines called interleukins that are secreted by T helper (Th) cells and antigen-presenting cells (APCs), such as macrophages. Th cells and APCs cooperate; APCs secrete IL-1 and other cytokines that stimulate Th cells to secrete a host of cytokines including interferon γ (IFN-γ), which then increases the phagocytic ability of APCs, ultimately improving their antigen-presenting capacity. Cytokines involved in the acquired immune response often simultaneously serve multiple functions. For example, in addition to the effects noted above, IFN-γ also has direct antiviral properties, and IL-1 stimulates the expression of IL-2, which in turn activates multiple lymphocyte functions (Fig. 1.13–3). 
Cytokines can be broadly divided into categories based on their role in the initiation, regulation, and maintenance of the immune response. Hence, there are cytokines that mediate innate immunity and inflammation (Table 1.13–2), cytokines that regulate acquired immunity (Table 1.13–3), and cytokines that control proliferation and differentiation of immature immune cells (Table 1.13–4). Although structurally distinct, these cytokines overlap in function and act together to govern the dynamic events of immunity. Within the acquired immune response, significant interest has been paid to the concept that there are two varieties of Th cells (designated as clusters of differentiation [CD] 4+) known as Th1 and Th2. Th1 cells produce cytokines such as IL-2 and IFN-γ that promote T cell and inflammatory responses that are especially relevant for protection against intracellular pathogens. Th2 cells produce cytokines such as IL-4 that promote antibody production and provide protection against parasites. When excessive, Th2 responses also have been closely associated with allergic and hypersensitivity reactions as well as asthma. A third subset of Th cells that are developmentally distinct from Th1 or Th2 cells and that produce IL-17 (Th17 cells) has been identified as an important source of inflammation central to the development of many autoimmune and allergic conditions that were once thought to be more closely involved with Th1 or Th2 dysregulation. More recently additional subsets of effector cells have been found, notably Th9 cells, which secrete IL-9 and seem to be 

========561========

predominantly proinflammatory, and Th22 cells, which secrete IL-22 and can have either proinflammatory or anti-inflammatory effects. Finally, CD4 cells can differentiate into T regulatory cells (Tregs) that dampen immune activation both via direct cell-to-cell effects and via production of anti- inflammatory cytokines, especially IL-10. This crucial function is discussed later. 
After binding antigen in the presence of stimulatory cytokines, T and B lymphocytes with the appropriate binding sites are activated, leading to cell growth, division, and proliferation. Activation also results in the clonal expansion of immune cells with the identical high-affinity specificity for the foreign antigen. Some of the progeny during clonal expansion undergo further differentiation into mature effector cells, such as antibody-secreting plasma B cells and cytotoxic CD8+ T-lymphocytes (CTLs). In contrast, some descendants of activated B or T cells become memory cells that are primed for activation on future stimulation by the same antigen. Reexposure to that antigen results in a secondary immune response (thus the name acquired immunity), which is typically more rapid and robust than the first or primary immune response to that antigen. Memory cells may live for many years providing long-lasting acquired immunity, as demonstrated by individuals who have received a vaccine or had their first contact with a specific infectious agent during infancy. 
FIGURE 1.13–3. Inflammation and disease. IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa beta; CRP, C-reactive protein. (From Cowles MK, Miller AH. Stress, cytokines and depressive illness. In: Squire LR, ed. The New Encyclopedia of Neuroscience. Oxford: Academic Press; 2008.) 
Table 1.13–3. 

========562========

Cytokine Mediators of Acquired Immunity 
Cytokines Interleukin-2 (IL-2) 
Source T cells 
Interleukin-4 (IL-4) 
CD4+ T cells 
Interleukin-5 (IL-5) 
T cell 
Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) 
T cells, others 
Target T cell NK cell B cell T cell B cell Eosinophil B cell T cell B cell Macrophage 
Primary Effect 
Growth, cytokine production Growth, activation Growth, antibody production Growth, differentiation Isotype switching to IgE Activation 
Growth, IgA production Inhibit growth and activation Inhibit growth 
Inhibit activation 
Adapted from Abbas AK, Lichtman AH, Pober JS. Cellular and Molecular Immunology. Philadelphia, PA: 
WB Saunders; 2000, with permission. 
especially 
effective 
in 
During the effector phase, the pathogen is neutralized and eliminated. The principal effector mechanisms of acquired immunity are mediated by antibodies (humoral immunity) secreted from B cells, and by CTLs that kill target cells directly and macrophage-activating cytokines such as IFN-γ that enhance antimicrobial functions of macrophages including microglia (cellular immunity). Humoral immunity is 
combating extracellular pathogens, such as bacteria and parasites, while cellular immunity is effective in protecting against viral and intracellular bacterial infection and, as with NK cells, may provide some protection against tumor cells. Regulation of the acquired immune response is another important component of the effector phase and includes CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells, which are immunosuppressive in nature and serve to restrict immune responses to self-antigens. In addition, the inhibitory costimulatory molecule called programmed death-1 (PD-1) and its ligands have been shown to play an important role in regulating T-cell activation. Indeed, loss of PD-1 has been associated with an autoimmune diathesis in 
laboratory animals. 
The effector components of innate immunity are also recruited, enhanced, and directed toward specific pathogens as a result of the actions of B and T cells. For example, circulating antibodies can neutralize pathogens by binding to and coating the pathogens (opsonization). Pathogens that are opsonized are made susceptible to lysis by complement factors and phagocytosis. NK cells and phagocytic cells, such as neutrophils and macrophages, have receptors for the Fc fragment (fragment crystallizable region) of antibodies. Furthermore, complement proteins bind to and are activated by the Fc fragments of some types of antibodies. Thus, antibodies can link effector cells and cytolytic proteins of innate immunity with pathogens, lending a level of specificity that is not 

========563========

inherent in the effector innate immune processes themselves. 
inflammation 
is 
in 
several 
psychiatric disorders. 
Regulation of the Immune Response 
An effective immune response requires the cooperation of many components of the immune system, often resulting in the augmentation of each component’s contribution to the overall immune response. However, the simultaneous indiscriminate amplification of all aspects of the immune system would not be efficient and could even be disastrous. An overactive immune system may contribute to autoimmunity. Furthermore, the inflammatory component of immune responses can be damaging if not controlled, as is seen in immune complex diseases and septic shock. Therefore, regulation of the immune response is necessary to make sure that the response is energy efficient, focused on the infectious agent, counterbalanced in a fashion that does not cause self-damage, and reversible once the pathogen has been eliminated. The immune system is potentially dangerous to the host, and needs to be controlled by efficient negative feedback. A pathological failure to shut off inappropriate 
now implicated 
Interestingly, several organisms found within the gut microbiota are known to have major impacts on Treg development, so the immune system both regulates, and is regulated by the microbiota. 
Probably the most important form of intrinsic regulation of the immune system is mediated by the various cytokines. Several examples of the facilitatory effects of cytokines have been cited. Conversely, cytokines such as transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) and IL-10 potently inhibit lymphocyte activation and proliferation and antagonize the activity of proinflammatory cytokines (Tables 1.13–2 and 1.13–3). In addition, as noted above, regulatory T cells play a pivotal role in suppressing the function of other immune cell types. 
Table 1.13–4. 
Cytokine Mediators of Immune Cell Growth and Differentiation 
Cytokines Interleukin-3 (IL-3) 
Source T cell 
Granulocyte–monocyte 
colony-stimulating 
factor (G–M CSF) 
T cell, 
Macrophage CSF 
Granulocyte CSF 
Interleukin-7 
monocyte, 
macrophage, 
others Macrophage, 
others Monocyte, 
macrophage, 
others Fibroblast, 
Target 
Immature progenitor 
Immature and 
committed 
progenitors, 
macrophages Committed 
progenitor Committed 
progenitor 
Immature progenitor 
Primary Effect 
Growth and differentiation to 
many cell lines 
Growth and differentiation to all 
cell lines 
Differentiation to monocyte, 
macrophage 
Differentiation to neutrophil, 
eosinophil, basophil 
Growth of T- and B-cell lines 

========564========

Leukemia inhibitory 
factor (LIF) 
bone 
marrow 
stromal cells Fibroblast, 
bone 
marrow 
stromal cells 
Immature 
progenitors, others 
Governs growth and 
differentiation of 
hematopoietic and monocyte 
cell lines 
Adapted from Abbas AK, Lichtman AH, Pober JS. Cellular and Molecular Immunology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2000, with permission. 
Table 1.13–5. 
Foundations of Nervous, Endocrine, and Immune System Interactions 
1. Expression of receptors for neurotransmitters, hormones, and neuropeptides on immune cells 2. Autonomic nervous system innervation of lymphoid tissues 
3. Conditioning of the immune response 
4. Stress effects on immune function 
5. Expression of cytokines and their receptors in the CNS 
6. Influence of the immune system on neurotransmitter turnover, neuroendocrine function synaptic 
plasticity, regional brain activity, and behavior 
The relative significance of extrinsic regulation of the immune response remains to be fully established. However, increasing evidence of neural- immune interactions indicates that extrinsic factors of CNS origin play an important role in the modulation of the immune system. These data provide the foundation for nervous, endocrine, and immune system interactions, many of which are relevant to psychiatry (Table 1.13–5). 

========565========

EVIDENCE OF NERVOUS SYSTEM AND IMMUNE SYSTEM INTERACTIONS Immune Cell Receptors 
As outlined in Table 1.13–6, cells from the immune system express receptors for a wide variety of molecules that are, in part, regulated by or derived from the nervous system. One of the first receptors to be characterized in lymphocytes was the β-adrenergic receptor, which is the predominant adrenergic receptor subtype expressed on T and B cells. Subsequently, receptors for the other small molecule neurotransmitters have been described. As in the nervous system, receptors for neurotransmitters on immune cells are located in the cell membrane and in most cases are coupled to G proteins and their associated second- messenger pathways. 
Several important concepts from research on receptors in immune cells and tissues are central to understanding the effects of neutrally derived molecules on immune function. First, the expression of receptors is heterogeneous. For example, of the two types of receptors for adrenal steroids, mineralocorticoid receptors and glucocorticoid receptors (GRs), only GRs are expressed in the thymus, whereas both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors are expressed in the spleen. Related to heterogeneity in receptor expression in immune cells and tissues is heterogeneity in receptor density. Heterogeneity of receptor expression/density is relevant for determining the net effect of circulating transmitters on immune function. For example, the β2 adrenergic receptor is expressed on resting and activated B cells, naive CD4+ T cells, newly generated Th1 cells, and Th1-cell clones. However, it is not expressed on newly generated Th2 cells or Th2 cell clones. Consistent with these findings, norepinephrine (NE) has been found to enhance IL-12–induced differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells into Th1 cells and to promote production of IFN-γ by these cells. No effect was found on IL-4–induced Th2 cell differentiation. The effect of NE on Th1-type responses is also manifested by the ability of NE to help Th1 cells support B-cell antibody production. 
Table 1.13–6. 
Receptors for Neurotransmitters, Hormones, and Peptides on Immune 
Cells 
Neurotransmitters Hormones Peptides Acetylcholine Corticosteroids–glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids ACTH Dopamine Gonadal steroids–estrogen, progesterone, testosterone α-MSH Histamine Growth hormone AVP Norepinephrine Prolactin Calcitonin Serotonin Opioids (endorphins, enkephalins) CGRP 

========566========

Thyroid hormone 
CRH GHRH GnRH IGF-1 Melatonin NPY PTH Somatostatin Substance P TRH TSH VIP 
ACTH, adrenocorticotropin; α-MSH, α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone; AVP, arginine vasopressin; CGRP, calcitonin gene–related peptide; CRH, corticotrophin-releasing hormone; GHRH, growth hormone–releasing hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor-1; NPY, neuropeptide Y; PTH, parathyroid hormone; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide. 
Another important concept is that a change in the circulating concentration of a hormone or transmitter is not necessarily reflected equally in all immune compartments. For example, stress-related increases in glucocorticoids are more effective in activating GRs in the peripheral blood and the thymus than in the spleen. Thus, the microenvironment of any given tissue is critical in determining hormonal or neurotransmitter influences on immune function. Taken together with the heterogeneity in receptor expression and density, the data demonstrate that the influence of any given molecule on the immune system is a function of (1) the type of cell that exhibits the relevant receptor, (2) the density of the receptors on that cell, and (3) whether that cell is located in an immune compartment that allows access of the relevant molecule to the receptor under the conditions being studied. 
Cross talk between receptor-associated second-messenger pathways is another important mechanism by which neutrally derived or regulated molecules can influence the immune response and vice versa. For example, activation of cytokine signaling pathways including p38 MAPK by IL-2 and IL-4 (as well as IL-1, TNF, IL-6 and IL-8) has been shown to downregulate GR expression or function and may account for the glucocorticoid resistance seen in some inflammatory disorders (such as asthma) as well as major depression (see below). 
In Vitro and In Vivo Effects 
Numerous chemical messengers derived from or regulated by the nervous system are capable of altering immune cell function and distribution. Table 1.13–7 provides a necessarily simplified, representative listing of selected neurotransmitters and neuropeptides and their immune effects. Table 1.13–8 lists some of the immune activities of hormone messengers. The 

========567========

immunological effects of these agents depend on a number of factors aside from those involving the relevant expression, density, and activation of receptors on target immune cells. For example, the effect of any given molecule on the immune system depends on the phase of the immune response (recognition, activation, or effector) that is involved. NE, for example, has been found to promote immune function during the recognition phase, both potentiate and inhibit immune function during the activation and proliferation phase, and inhibit the effector phase. The potentiation of the activation phase occurs at low concentrations of NE, but inhibition occurs at high NE concentrations. These findings indicate that both the timing of exposure and the dose are important. 
Table 1.13–7. 
Immunological Effects of Representative Neurotransmitters and 
Neuropeptides 
Chemical Messengers Neurotransmitters Norepinephrine 
In Vitro 
Stimulation of T-cell proliferation at low 
concentrations, high concentrations 
are inhibitory; enhancement of IL-12– 
induced differentiation of naïve CD4 
cells into Th1 cells; inhibition of Th1- 
type cytokines (IFN-γ) and stimulation 
of Th2- type cytokines (IL-10) in 
Serotonin 
PBMC; activation of NF-κB and 
proinflammatory cytokines At suprapharmacological 
concentrations: suppression of lymphocyte reactivity to mitogens 
and antigens 
At physiogical concentrations: inhibition 
of monocyte-induced suppression of 
NK cell activity; promotes capacity of 
macrophages to enhance T-cell 
activation; enhancement of 
macrophage superoxide production and IFN-γ–induced phagocytosis; stimulation of chemotactic factors; 
contributes to DTH 
Neuropeptides Opioids 
Enhancement of T-cell proliferation, NK 
activity, cytokine production, and 
generation of cytotoxic T cells 
Immunological Activity 
In Vivo 
Influences immune cell trafficking; 
redistribution of NK cells from spleen 
to blood; inhibition of NK cell activity 
and cytolytic T-cell activity; inhibits 
generation of antigen-specific T cells 
in draining lymph nodes but increases 
inflammation in joints during 
autoimmune arthritis 
Suppression of humoral and cellular 
immune responses; enhancement of 
immune activity when serotonin 
availability is decreased 
Mediation of immunosuppressive 
effects of stress on NK activity; 
inhibition of mitogen-induced 
lymphocyte proliferation and 
phagocytic cell function; inhibition of 
antibody production; diminished DTH; 

========568========

Substance P 
Enhancement of lymphocyte 
proliferation, lymphocyte and 
monocyte chemotaxis, and monocyte 
production of IL-1, IL-6, and TNF; 
augmentation of IgA synthesis; 
induction of mast cell degranulation; 
promotion of superoxide anion 
release from neutrophils and 
eosinophils; increases infectivity of 
HIV 
Suppression of antibody production and 
disruption of macrophage-mediated 
tumoricidal activity 
Stimulation of T- and B-cell 
proliferation; enhances IL-1 and IL-6 
secretion but inhibits IFN-γ secretion 
promotion of splenic immune cell 
apoptosis 
Increased severity of adjuvant-induced 
arthritis; associated with 
hypersensitivity reactions and chronic 
inflammatory disorders 
ACTH 
Activation of immunoregulatory 
glucocorticoids 
CRH 
VIP 
Enhancement of monocyte chemotaxis; 
inhibition of Ig and IL-2 production; 
inhibition of NK activity and one-way 
MLR 
Inhibits proinflammatory cytokine 
release from PBMCs 
Exerts mixed proinflammatory (e.g., in 
the periphery) and 
immunosuppressive (central) actions; 
promotes IL-1 production in CNS and 
increases IL-2; activates the HPA axis; 
suppresses NK cell activity in the 
spleen; inhibits antibody production 
and decreases T-cell numbers; 
inhibits mitogen-induced T-cell 
proliferation 
Inhibition of egress of lymphocytes from 
sheep lymph nodes 
α-MSH 
Antipyretic and anti-inflammatory 
ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; CRH, corticotrophin-releasing hormone; DTH, delayed-type hypersensitivity; HPA, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal; IFN, interferon; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; MLR, mixed lymphocyte reaction; MSH, melanocyte-stimulating hormone; NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa B; NK, natural killer; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide. 
Issues of timing are also relevant in terms of development and aging. In aged rats, for example, a progressive loss of noradrenergic innervation of the spleen is accompanied by a progressive increase in the density of β- receptors on splenic lymphocytes. However, there is also an age-related dysfunction that involves impaired coupling between the β-receptor and adenylate cyclase, indicating that noradrenergic agents may have variable, unpredictable effects on immune function in old animals. 
Related to the phase of the immune response and developmental stage of the animal is the type of immune response as it relates to pathophysiology. Substances that are primarily inhibitory to immune function may promote tumor development in animals with cancer but may attenuate the development of autoimmune disease. For example, 

========569========

glucocorticoids accelerate the growth of tumors in mice, whereas they inhibit the development of several types of autoimmune disorders, including experimental allergic encephalitis (a model of multiple sclerosis) and streptococcal cell-wall–induced polyarthritis (a model of rheumatoid arthritis). Relevant to the effects of gonadal steroids on immune function, estrogens tend to promote Th1-type responses, while progesterone tends to promote Th2-type responses. Accordingly, during pregnancy, Th2-type immune responses prevail (possibly secondary to the increased influence of progesterone), and autoimmune disorders related to excessive Th1-like activity (multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis) may improve. In contrast, diseases related to Th2-like activity (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus) may be exacerbated during pregnancy. Normal pregnancy is also associated with an increase in Treg activity and a decrease in Th17 activity. This shift toward an anti-inflammatory Treg/Th17 balance can fail to occur in some cases of unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion. 
Table 1.13–8. 
Representative Listing of Hormone Messengers and Their Immunological 
Effects 
Immunological Activity 
Chemical Messengers Hormones Adrenal 
steroids 
In Vitro 
Inhibition of IL-1, IL-2, and interferon; 
augmentation of IL-4 production; 
inhibition of NK activity, mitogen 
proliferation, and antigen presentation; 
promotion of T-cell differentiation 
toward Th2 profile and away from Th1 
profile 
Estrogen 
Inhibition of T suppressor cell and NK cell 
activity; increased macrophage 
phagocytosis and lysosomal activity; 
promotion of T-cell differentiation 
toward Th1 profile; increased IL-6 and IL- 
10; inhibition of B-cell apoptosis 
In Vivo 
Thymic involution; lymphopenia; 
monocytopenia; neutrophilia; 
suppression of inflammation and cell- 
mediated immunity during chronic 
exposure; enhancement of immune 
responsiveness during acute exposure, 
modulation of apoptosis, immune cell 
trafficking 
Lymphopenia; decreased mitogen 
responsiveness, NK activity and 
macrophage phagocytosis; increased 
plasma cells in spleen; promotion of 
autoantibodies 
Progesterone Decreased mitogen responsiveness at high 
concentrations; inhibition of T-cell 
activation and cytotoxicity; inhibition of 
NK cell activity; inhibition of 
Growth 
hormone 
prostaglandin synthesis; promotion of T- 
cell differentiation toward Th2 profile Enhancement of mitogen responsiveness 
and cytotoxic T-cell activity; priming of 
macrophages and neutrophils for 
superoxide anion release; augmentation 
of neutrophil differentiation; 
Increased skin graft survival; increased 
survival of xenographic tumor cells; 
increases risk of viral infection; 
decreased CD4+ cell numbers 
Increases thymus and spleen size and 
cellularity; augmentation of antibody 
synthesis, T- and B-cell proliferation, IL- 
2 production, mitogen responsiveness, 
and NK activity; promotes survival 

========570========

enhancement of neutrophil and 
macrophage phagocytosis; increases 
synthesis of IFN-γ 
Insulin-like 
growth 
factor 
Prevention of promyeloid cell apoptosis; 
promotes priming of macrophages and 
neutrophils for superoxide anion release; 
enhancement of neutrophil and 
macrophage phagocytosis; inhibition of nuclear translocation of NF-κB following 
TNF-α exposure 
Prolactin 
Removal of PRL from culture media inhibits 
DNA synthesis and cell proliferation; 
comitogenic with IL-2; inhibits T-cell 
apoptosis; promotion of Th2 cytokine 
production from T cells 
during bacterial infection 
Promotes hematopoiesis and 
lymphopoiesis; increases thymus and 
spleen size and cellularity; enhances 
overall immune responsiveness in aged 
animals; blocks TNF-α induction during 
septic shock; blocks TNF-α–induced 
sickness behavior 
Increases thymus and spleen size and 
cellularity; counteracts glucocorticoid- 
mediated immunosuppression; PRL 
removal reduces NK activity and T-cell 
proliferation and increases lethality of 
Listeria challenge; stimulates 
autoimmunity 
IL, interleukin; NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa B; NK, natural killer; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; PRL, 
prolactin. 
Another important factor in determining the immunological effect of a particular molecule is its indirect effects, as well as its direct effects, on the immune system. In vitro studies provide important information on the direct effects of the various chemical messengers, but the influence of those agents in vivo may be completely different. For example, a number of in vitro studies have shown that opioid peptides are capable of enhancing NK cell activity (NKCA). However, in vivo, opioid peptides play an important role in mediating the inhibitory effects of shock stress on NKCA, most likely through effects in the brain. In vivo, neutrally derived molecules act against a complicated background of multiple hormones that may have synergistic or antagonist effects or both. Furthermore, many of the hormones and transmitters influence other bodily systems, including the cardiovascular system, which may influence the traffic of immune cells to various organs, immunological and otherwise. Changes in immunocyte distribution may ultimately have effects on cellular function. 
Neural Innervation of Lymphoid Tissue 
Identification of nerve fibers derived from the SNS in immune tissues was one of the first indications that communication between the CNS and the immune system was possible. Sympathetic nerve fibers have been identified in organs that are responsible for the development, education 
(e.g., 
self–nonself 
discrimination), 
and 
function 
of 
lymphocytes. 
Specifically, nerve fibers are found in the bone marrow, thymus, spleen, and lymph nodes. The nerves that innervate the thymus gland are derived from the vagus, phrenic, and recurrent laryngeal nerves and from the stellate and other small ganglia of the thoracic sympathetic chain. The 

========571========

nonmyelinated nerves that innervate the bone marrow arise from the level of the spinal cord associated with the location of the bone. The spleen obtains its sympathetic nerves from the celiac ganglion. SNS innervation of lymph nodes is not as dense or as uniquely distributed as that of the spleen and thymus. 
In general, sympathetic nerve fibers enter lymphoid tissues in association with the vascular supply. Because these nerves play an important role in vascular tone, their presence in association with the smooth muscle cells of the blood vessels is not unexpected. However, the nerve fibers also travel with small blood vessels devoid of smooth muscle cells and are present in the parenchyma of the lymphoid tissue (Fig. 1.13– 4). Electron microscopy has shown that sympathetic nerve terminals exist in close approximation with lymphocytes and macrophages. Thus, the sympathetic branch of the ANS is in a position to influence the immune system either by changing the vascular tone and blood flow into lymphoid organs or by directly influencing immune cell function via locally released neurotransmitters, especially NE as well as neuropeptides such as NPY, substance P, VIP, calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP), and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which, in turn, interact with specific receptors on nearby immune cells. 
FIGURE 1.13–4. Conditioned immunosuppression. Mortality rate in first filial generation female mice (New Zealand black × New Zealand white) treated with saccharin and cyclophosphamide (CY) weekly and then continued on a regimen of saccharin and CY (group conditioned stimulus [CS] + unconditioned stimulus [US], N = 6), continued on saccharin alone (group CS, N = 11), or deprived of both saccharin and CY (no treatment [TRT], N = 6). (From Ader R. Behaviorally conditioned modulation of immunity. In: Guillemin R, Cohen M, Melnechuk T, eds. Neural Modulation of Immunity. New York: Raven Press; 1985, with permission.) 
Regarding 
the 
functional 
implications 
of 
sympathetic 
nervous 

========572========

innervation of immune tissues, chemical sympathectomy in laboratory animals has variable effects on immune function, depending in part on the phase of the immune response studied. The reported effects of sympathectomy include suppressed antibody responses to sheep red blood cells, suppressed cytolytic T-cell activity, and enhanced NKCA. Splenic sympathectomy also leads to an upregulation of β-adrenergic receptors on lymphocytes and a decrease in suppressor lymphocyte (T-cell) function. In multiple model systems, sympathectomy reduces peripheral inflammatory tone, an effects associated with suppression of Th1 and Th17 activity. Aside from the phase of the immune response, other factors that influence the effects of sympathetic nervous innervation on immune function include the animal’s age, sex, and strain. Of note, there is also evidence that local immune responses within the microenvironment of immune tissues may be able to interact directly with sympathetic nerve fibers through the effects of cytokines on neurotransmitter release. 
While SNS effects on immune function have been well-established, more recently studies have shown that the parasympathetic branch of the ANS also contributes to immune regulation. Via an efferent neural signaling pathway referred to as the cholinergic anti-inflammatory reflex, studies have found that stimulation of the vagus nerve attenuates immune system activation and the physiological signs of septic shock in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS). These effects are mediated by vagal release of acetylcholine that interacts with the α7 subunit of the nicotinic AChR (α7 nAChR) on relevant immune cells, and suppresses the production of a host of cytokines, including TNF-α, via inhibition of NF-κB, as well as other inflammatory signaling molecules (Fig. 1.13–5). This influence of efferent vagal pathways on the immune response has been demonstrated in the context of a variety of inflammatory processes including myocardial ischemia, hemorrhagic shock, ischemia/reperfusion, and pancreatitis. 
Finally, in addition to the immunological influences of the PNS and SNS efferent nerve fibers, increasing attention is now being directed to the study of sensory afferent fibers and their relevance to immune system communication with the brain. For example, sensory afferent fibers have been shown to relay immune signals to the brain through cytokine receptors on paraganglia of the vagus nerve. Vagal nerve fibers transmit cytokine signals to the nucleus of the solitary tract, where nervous system pathways project to other brain regions, including the hypothalamus, hippocampus, and amygdala, which are relevant to the CNS response to immune system activation (see below). Although much of the research on these “sensory” immune functions has focused on the vagus nerve, it should be noted that sensory fibers distributed throughout the body, such as skin, muscle, and all mucosal surfaces, can respond to immunological stimuli and transmit this information to the CNS. 

========573========

SOCIAL ADVERSITY, ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES, AND THE IMMUNE RESPONSE 
As shown in Table 1.13–9, most factors that increase the risk of depression in the modern world also increase levels of peripheral inflammatory biomarkers, and many factors that enhance emotional well-being have been shown to lower inflammation. Interest in the effects of the larger environment on the immune system grew out of a series of animal and human studies suggesting that stressful stimuli can influence the development of immune-related disorders, including infectious diseases, cancer, and autoimmune disorders. While stress was initially thought to be associated with suppression of immune function, ever-increasing data indicate that such a conclusion oversimplifies the complexities of the mammalian immune response to environmental perturbation and that stress may also activate certain aspects of the immune system, particularly the innate proinflammatory immune response (Fig. 1.13–6). 
Stress and Illness 
Experiments conducted on laboratory animals in the late 1950s and the early 1960s indicated that a wide variety of stressors—including isolation, rotation, crowding, exposure to a predator, and electric shock—increased morbidity and mortality in response to several types of tumors and infectious diseases caused by viruses and parasites. However, as research progressed it became increasingly clear that “stress” is too variegated a concept to have singular effects on immunity and that, in fact, the effects of stress on immunity can be opposite depending on a number of factors. Chief among these factors is whether a stressor is acute or chronic. Other critical variables include stressor severity and type, as well as the timing of stressor application and the type of tumor or infectious agent investigated. For example, mice subjected to electric grid shock 1 to 3 days before the infection of Maloney murine sarcoma virus–induced tumor cells exhibited a decreased tumor size and incidence. In contrast, mice exposed to grid shock 2 days after tumor cell injection exhibited an increase in tumor size and number. 
The relevance of the effects of stress on immune-related health outcomes in humans has been demonstrated in studies that have shown an association between chronic stress and increased susceptibility to the common cold, reduced antibody responses to vaccination, and delayed wound healing. In addition, stress, as well as depression, through their effects on inflammation has been linked to increased morbidity and mortality in infectious diseases, such as HIV infection, autoimmune disorders, neoplastic diseases, as well as diabetes and cardiovascular disorders, which are increasingly being recognized as diseases in which the immune system, and inflammation in particular, plays a pivotal role (Fig. 

========574========

1.13–7). 
FIGURE 1.13–5. Stress and bidirectional neural–immune interactions. (A) Activation of NF-κB through toll-like receptors (TLRs) during immune challenge leads to an inflammatory response including (B) the release of proinflammatory cytokines, TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6. C: These cytokines, in turn, access the brain via leaky regions in the blood–brain barrier, active transport molecules, and afferent nerve fibers (e.g., sensory vagus), which relay information through the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS). D: Once in the brain, cytokine signals participate in pathways known to be involved in the development of depression, including: (i) altered metabolism of relevant neurotransmitters such as serotonin (5HT) and dopamine (DA), (ii) activation of CRH in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and the subsequent production and/or release of ACTH and glucocorticoids (cortisol), and (iii) disruption of synaptic plasticity through alterations in relevant growth factors (e.g., brain- derived neurotrophic factor [BDNF]). (E) Exposure to environmental stressors promotes activation of inflammatory signaling (NF-κB) through increased outflow of proinflammatory sympathetic nervous system responses (release of NE, which binds to the α [αAR] and β [βAR] adrenoceptors). (F) Stressors also induce withdrawal of inhibitory motor vagal input (release of acetylcholine [Ach], which binds to the α7 subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor [α7nACRh]). (G) Activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, including p38 and Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), inhibit the function of glucocorticoid receptors (GRs), thereby releasing NF-κB from negative regulation by glucocorticoids released as a result of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis in response to stress. (See color atlas.) (From Raison CL, Capuron L, Miller AH. Trends in Immunology, 27, Cytokines sing the blues: inflammation and pathogenesis of depression, 24–31, 2006, with permission from Elsevier.) 

========575========

Acute/Mild Stress 
Although a number of studies have demonstrated decreases in a variety of functional immune parameters (primarily related to acquired immune responses following acute stress), more recent data have suggested that the effects of acute stress are quite complex and involve considerations of the nature and location of the immune stimulus. Indeed, data from laboratory animals suggest that brief and/or mild stressors may actually enhance adaptive immunity. For example, in a series of elegant experiments in rats, it has been shown that a brief stressor (e.g., 2 hours of physical restraint) applied prior to antigen challenge significantly enhances delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH), an antigen-specific reaction mediated by CD4+ T lymphocytes, in the skin. Similarly, rodents exposed to an acute and/or mild stressor prior to antigen presentation have been reported to demonstrate enhanced humoral immunity by producing more antibodies than animals exposed to the same antigen in a control condition. Interestingly, the enhanced DTH and humoral immunity observed with mild/acute stressors are opposite to the effects seen if the stress intensity or duration is increased, even if the stressor type remains the same. In the case of DTH, the enhancing effect of acute stress appears to depend on stress-related increases of the glucocorticoid hormone, corticosterone, which can significantly increase the trafficking of immune cells to the site 
of antigen challenge. 
Table 1.13–9. 
Factors in the Modern World That Impact Inflammation and Depression 
Factors that Increase Inflammation And Increase Risk of Depression 
Early life adversity 
Obesity 
Sedentary lifestyle 
Processed foods 
Psychosocial stress 
Social isolation 
Poor sleep/insomnia 
Smoking 
Drug abuse/dependence 
Low socioeconomic status 
Female sex 
Reduced childhood exposure to co-evolved micro- 
organism 
Factors that Decrease Inflammation And Decrease Risk of Depression 
Mediterranean diet 
Exercise 
Positive social connectivity 
Early contact with pets and farm animals Experiencing reverence and awe 
Antidepressants 
Electroconvulsive therapy 
Psychotherapy 
Meditation 
Initial studies of acute stress in humans focused on changes in enumerative and in vitro immune system functional assessments. On the basis of a number of studies and three meta-analyses, a clear pattern of 

========576========

immune changes emerges from a host of acute stressors ranging from psychosocial laboratory stressors to first-time parachute jumping (Table 1.13–10). Enumerative changes include increased numbers of white blood cells, CTLs, and NK cells and decreased numbers of total B lymphocytes. Functional changes associated with acute stressors in humans include a decrease in lymphocyte responses to several nonspecific mitogens and an increase in NKCA, although it should be noted that this increased activity may largely reflect an increase in NK cell number. More recently, acute stressors have also been shown to suppress circulating number of Treg cells. 
FIGURE 1.13–6. Progressive loss, in high income settings, of contact with the immunoregulatory organisms with which humans coevolved. In communities with low socioeconomic status, there are numerous additional factors that also tend to increase background inflammation, including psychosocial stressors, bad diet, obesity and continued exposure to crowd infections. (Modified from Rook GA, Raison CL, Lowry CA. Microbial “old friends,” immunoregulation and socioeconomic status. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014;177(1):1– 12.) 

========577========

FIGURE 1.13–7. Sympathetic nervous system innervation of lymphoid tissue. Tyrosine hydroxylase-immunoreactive nerve processes (small arrowheads) in contact with the smooth muscle (S) of the central arteriole (A) and nerve processes (large arrowheads) in direct contact with lymphocytes (L) in the periarteriolar lymphatic sheath of the rat spleen. Transmission electron micrograph, ×6,732. (Courtesy of Denise L. Bellinger, Center for Neuroimmunology, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, and Suzanne Y. Stevens, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY.) 
Table 1.13–10. 
Effects of Acute Stress, Chronic Stress, and Depression on Immune 
Parameters in Humans 
Immune Variable Acute Stress Chronic Stress Major Depression Leukocytes ↑/↑ ↑/↑ ↑/↑ 
Lymphocytes ↑/↑ ↔ ↓/↓ 
Monocytes 0 ↔ 0 
T lymphocytes 0 ↓/↓ ↔ 

========578========

B lymphocytes 
CD4+ cells 
CD8+ cells 
NK cells 
CD4+/CD8+ 
% B cells 
% T cells 
% CD4+ 
% CD8+ 
% CD4+/CD8+ 
% NK cells 
NKCA (total) 
NKCA (per cell) 
Mitogen-induced proliferation Response to vaccine 
Antibody titers to EBV 
Cytolytic T-cell response to antigen Wound healing 
Th1/Th2 balance 
DTH 
TNF-α 
IFN-γ 
IL-1 
IL-2 
IL-4 
IL-6 
NF-κB 
CRP 
↓/↓ 0 ↑/↑ ↑/↑ ↓/↓ ↓/↓ 0 ↓/↓ 0 ↓/↓ ↑/↑ ↑/↑ ↔ ↓/↓ ↑ ↑/↑ ? ? ↑ ↑ 0 ↑/↑ ↑/↑ ? ↓/↓ ↑/↑ ↑ ↑/↑ 
↓/↓ ↓/↓ ↓/↓ ↓/↓ ↓/↓ ↔ ↓/↓ ↔ ↓/↓ ↔ ↔ ↓/↓ ↓ ↓/↓ ↓/↓ ↓/↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↔ ? ? ? ↓/↓ ? ↑ ? ↑ 
↔ ↔ ↔ 0 ↔ ↔ ↔ ↑/↑ ↔ ↔ ↔ ↓/↓ ↓ ↓/↓ ↓ ? ? ? ? ↓ ↑ ? ↑ ↑ ? ↑/↑ ? ↑ 
↑/↑, positive effect confirmed by meta-analysis; ↑, majority of studies suggest positive effect; ↓/↓, negative effect confirmed by meta-analysis; ↓, majority of studies suggest negative effect; 0, meta- analysis suggests no effect; ↔, conflicting findings;?, not enough data to suggest positive or negative relationship; NK cells, natural killer cells; CD4/CD8, ratio of CD4+ T lymphocytes to CD8+ T 
lymphocytes; CRP, C-reactive protein; NKCA, natural killer cell activity; EBV, Epstein–Barr virus; Th1/Th2, the ratio of T helper cell type 1 cytokines to T helper cell type 2 cytokines; DTH, delayed type hypersensitivity; NF-κB, nuclear factor κB. 
From Raison CL, Gumnick JF, Miller AH. Neuroendocrine–immune interactions: Implications for health and behavior. In: Hormones, Brain and Behavior. Vol 5. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2002, with permission. 
Regarding innate immune inflammatory responses, acute stress exposure in humans and laboratory animals has been shown to increase the expression of innate immune cytokines, activate microglia, and sensitize subsequent immune responses to inflammatory immune challenge. For example, peripheral blood concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines and/or their soluble receptors, especially IL-6, have been reported to be increased in the context of several acutely stressful situations, including 

========579========

public speaking, mental arithmetic, exercise, and academic examinations. While the mechanism by which stress induces cytokine production has yet to be fully elucidated, it has been shown that catecholamines may play an important role (see below). The effects of stress on innate immune responses appear to be mediated in part by activation of inflammatory signaling pathways including NF-κB, which is a lynchpin in the initiation of the inflammatory response following the stimulation of TLRs as well as relevant cytokine receptors. Recent studies have highlighted the health relevance of even mild and/or acute stress in humans. Two studies have now shown, for example, that men and women with histories of early life adversity (ELA) show markedly increased inflammatory responses to an acute laboratory stressor (the Trier Social Stress Test [TSST]), as assessed by increases in plasma concentrations of IL-6 and by increased production of the key intracellular inflammatory signaling molecule NF-κB (Fig. 1.13– 8). And circulating levels of Il-1-beta following the TSST were found to mediate the relationship between increased negative emotionality in response to the stressor and higher levels of depressive symptoms a year later. 
Chronic/Severe Stress 
In keeping with the well-documented health risks associated with chronic or severe stress, many studies confirm that more pernicious types of stressors are associated with immune alterations that may predispose toward disease development and are, in some cases, opposite to changes seen in the context of acute and/or mild stress (Table 1.13–10). Nevertheless, like acute stress, chronic stress also appears to be associated with enhanced proinflammatory activity. 
Many individual studies and three large meta-analyses of the chronic stress literature have found that, in humans, naturalistic stressors lasting from days to years evince a consistent pattern of functional immune changes that include a decrease in NKCA, a decrease in mitogen-induced lymphocyte proliferation, and a functional resistance to glucocorticoids in monocytes. Enumerative changes such as increases in circulating white blood cells and decreases in NK and T cells as well as alterations in the number and ratio of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells also have been reported. However, the consistency of these findings across studies is in part dependent upon the definition of chronic stress. 
Chronic and/or severe stress has been found to affect both humoral (i.e., antibody) and cellular immunity in ways directly relevant to “real world” immune functioning. Stressors such as exam taking or caring for a demented spouse have been repeatedly shown to impair the body’s ability to suppress the activity of latent viruses (especially Epstein–Barr virus [EBV]) as measured by an increase in latent viral antibodies and to 

========580========

interfere with antibody development following vaccination. Consistent with these findings, both examination and caregiving stress are associated with decrements in memory T-cell responses to latent virus antigens and to vaccines, both in terms of antigen-induced T-cell proliferation and T-cell– mediated killing of virally transformed B lymphocytes. 
In addition to effects on enumerative, functional and naturalistic measures of immune functioning, it has become increasingly recognized that both acute and chronic stress alter the mix of cytokines produced by T lymphocytes and that this alteration may contribute to the effects of stress on immunity and disease. While acute/mild stress in animals and humans may favor the in vitro production of the Th1 cytokine IFN-γ without increasing the Th2 cytokine IL-4, chronic/severe stressors in animals and humans tend to suppress lymphocyte production of the Th1 cytokines IFN- γ and IL-2, while not effecting or actually increasing the Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10. This shift from Th1 to Th2 may increase the susceptibility to allergic or hypersensitivity reactions, where Th2 responses play an important role. Interestingly, in a recent study in mice, chronic restraint stress was found to increase the susceptibility to skin cancer in association with decreases in IFN-γ production and increased expression of CD4+ CD25+ regulatory (suppressive) T cells. 
As noted above, chronic stress has also been associated with increased innate immune responses. For example, increased chronic stress prior to experimental inoculation with influenza A virus was found to correlate with higher IL-6 concentrations in nasal lavage and with increased behavioral symptom scores, suggesting that stress-related inflammatory activation may impair the body’s ability to control the immune response to viral infection. Moreover, recent data indicate that early life stress including parental loss or physical and/or sexual abuse during childhood is associated with increased markers of innate immune system activation, including CRP, in both nondepressed and depressed individuals at rest and in response to both acute and chronic stress. As noted in Figure 1.13–3, inflammation is believed to be involved in a number of medical illnesses, and therefore the relationship between early life stress and inflammation may represent an important pathophysiological mechanism that explains the increased medical morbidity in individuals exposed to early life stress. 

========581========

FIGURE 1.13–8. Early life stress, depression, and inflammation: Plasma interleukin (IL)-6 in patients with major depression and nondepressed comparison subjects before and after psychosocial stressor challenge. 
+Significant 
difference from baseline (p < 0.05). *Significant difference between groups (p < 0.05). (Modified from Pace TWW, Mletzko TC, Alagbe O, et al. Increased stress-induced inflammatory responses in male patients with major depression and increased early life stress. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:1630–1633.) 
Stress-Relevant Social Processes and Immune Functioning 
Physical and mental health are often thought of as intrapersonal phenomena, and stress is often conceptualized as a process that happens within the individual. Importantly, however, individuals live in social environments and continually interact with, and are influenced by, significant social others, such as spouses, partners, parents, and children. Recent evidence suggests that these social factors can influence immune regulation and functioning in ways that transcend simpler associations between stress and immunity. 
Distressing relationships, such as those that involve stressful encounters (e.g., martial strain) or negative interaction behaviors (e.g., showing anger or hostility, and interrupting or criticizing) can dysregulate immune function. Observational studies of relationship interactions, which use behavioral coding systems that assess actual behaviors as opposed to self-reported marital quality, have demonstrated that greater hostility displayed during relationship interactions is associated with several 

========582========

indicators of poorer immune function; these findings include larger increases in circulating markers of inflammation post-discussion, slower wound healing from suction blisters, smaller antibody responses to an influenza virus vaccine, and higher EBV antibody titers—the latter of which indicates poorer ability to control this latent herpes virus that infects most adults. A recent longitudinal study suggests a similar pattern of results: spouses who were in more distressing marriages at baseline had larger declines in cellular immune function (proliferative responses to two mitogens, concanavalin A and phytohemagglutinin) 2 years later when compared to spouses in less distressing marriages. 
Overtly negative social interactions or behaviors may not be required to adversely affect immune function. Interestingly, recent evidence suggests that being ambivalent about relationship partners—i.e., feeling simultaneously negative and positive toward a close relationship partner— may also influence immunity. Perceiving ambivalence toward one’s spouse in a support context was linked to greater inflammation (higher IL-6 and fibrinogen, and marginally higher CRP levels) even when considering health behaviors, relationship-specific romantic attachment style, spouse negativity/positivity ratings, and overall marital satisfaction. Furthermore, coronary-artery calcification scores were highest for individuals who both viewed and were viewed by their spouse in an ambivalent manner, suggesting that ambivalence may affect clinically relevant outcomes (e.g., cardiovascular disease, stroke), and potentially through immune mechanisms. 
However, supportive relationships, including those that involve positive interaction behaviors, supportive communication patterns, and warm touch, may confer immunoprotective effects. The majority of perceived social support research suggests that people who feel more supported have better immune function than those who feel less supported. Benefits for people who feel more supported include lower systemic inflammation, larger antibody responses to pneumococcal pneumonia, hepatitis B, and influenza virus vaccines, and lower EBV titers, than those who feel less social support. Additionally, couples who displayed more positive behaviors (e.g., acceptance, self-disclosure, humor) and who used more cognitive processing words during interaction tasks exhibited faster wound repair and had lower systemic inflammatory responses even 24 hours after the interaction task than couples who displayed fewer positive behaviors and used fewer cognitive processing words. Findings also suggest that warm physical contact (hugging and kissing) may be immune enhancing; circulating levels of IFN-γ decreased significantly in couples after an hour- long experimental induction of warm physical contact (hugging and kissing), whereas levels did not change in the control condition (couples who read books in separate rooms). 
Relationship processes that involve social rejection also have 

========583========

immunological consequences. Social rejection has often been studied in the context of depression due to the sustained inflammatory process that may elicit sickness behaviors and precipitate depression for vulnerable individuals. In a longitudinal study of 147 adolescent girls at elevated risk for depression, participants had significantly higher levels of mRNA for both proinflammatory transcription factor NF-κB and I-κB, which regulates the effects of NF-κB, at visits when they had experienced a recent targeted rejection life event compared to visits when no such event had occurred. A growing body of research suggests that stressors involving social rejection and exclusion activate neural regions involved in processing negative affect, including the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and anterior insula. These neural regions activate multiple biological systems, including, in particular, the HPA axis and sympathetic–adrenal–medullary axis, which produce cortisol and catecholamines that can bind to receptors on immune cells, which then modulate the release of proinflammatory cytokines. Thus, social stress-related implications on the neurocognitive pathway involving the dACC and anterior insula may be one mechanism linking social threat and rejection with elevated inflammation and risk for depression. Indeed individuals with elevated dACC responses to social rejection during a neuroimaging paradigm also show increased inflammatory responses to a laboratory psychosocial stressor. 
In a series of groundbreaking papers, Steve Cole and colleagues have shown that many types of psychosocial adversity (i.e., loneliness and conflict) share in common a pattern of gene expression characterized by increased NF-κB–mediated inflammation and reduced type I IFN signaling. Interestingly this pattern appears to subserve an adaptive evolutionary logic. Across evolutionary time, individuals in close interpersonal groupings would have benefited from enhanced antiviral immunity conferred by type I IFN activity, whereas isolated individuals would be more likely to face infectious threat from dangers in the environment, especially bacteria delivered by wounding (because ostracized humans were at significantly increased risk of predation and/or physical injury from other social groups). 
Disruptions in Relations with the Microbial World as a Source of Inflammation in the Modern World 
Increasing evidence suggests that modern environmental practices have disrupted human relationships with a range of micro-organisms in ways that may help to account for a wide range of immune-based pathologies that are far more common in industrialized societies than in environments more consistent with those in which humans evolved. Initial theorizing regarding the role of human–microbial interactions in the explosion of immune disorders in the twentieth century focused on the possibility that reduced exposure to childhood infectious diseases in the modern world

========584========

might be the culprit. As originally articulated in the “hygiene hypothesis,” it was theorized that factors unique to industrialized societies, including improved sanitation, modern medicine, and smaller family size, reduce the prevalence and change the timing of childhood infections in a way that promotes the development of allergy and asthma. Because infections typically mobilize Th1-type inflammatory responses, a necessary correlate of this idea was that the loss of infection-induced Th1 activation early in life released Th2 processes from appropriate regulatory control, with resultant increases in allergy and asthma. However, rather than decreasing (as would be predicted from the Th1–Th2 balance idea), an array of Th1-mediated autoimmune conditions was also exploding in prevalence in exactly the same countries in which allergy was on the rise. A potential resolution to this inconsistency, implicating other types of microbial and parasitic agents with powerful effects on regulatory dendritic cells and Tregs, began to emerge in the late 1990s. As eventually articulated in the “old friends” hypothesis, the link between modernity and increased inflammatory, atopic, and autoimmune disease might be better explained by disruptions of ancient associations with mostly nonpathogenic micro-organisms once ubiquitous in both the external and internal (i.e., microbiota) human environment, which have been largely (or completely) banished from developed countries (Fig. 1.13–3). These organisms induce and maintain an adaptive level of immune suppression by stimulating T cells to differentiate along regulatory, rather than Th1 or Th2 lines, with a resultant increased production of anti-inflammatory, immunoregulatory cytokines, especially IL-10 and TGF-β. 
Significant in vitro and in vivo preclinical data indicate that all three classes of “Old Friend” organisms (microbiota, pseudocommensals, and parasites) have the potential to prevent or ameliorate pathology in animal models for autoimmune, allergic, and inflammatory bowel diseases, as well as neoplasms and certain infections, and do so via reductions in inflammatory activity. While data implicating alterations in human– microbial interactions in the development of psychiatric disease are limited, many animal studies indicate that these interactions have immune and behavioral effects of direct relevance to psychiatric functioning. Perhaps the most compelling animal data demonstrating the ability of the microbiota to influence brain functioning and stress-relevant behavior come from studies showing that transplanting the microbiota from one strain of mouse to another causes the recipient mice to take on the behavioral repertoire of the donors. In addition to direct effects on immune functioning, there is evidence to suggest that the gut microbiome profoundly affects other whole body physiological processes, including peripheral pain sensitivity, sleep, and metabolism, that are affected by activity in inflammatory signaling pathways and that are abnormal in a variety of psychiatric conditions. Moreover, an increasing number of 
========585========

animal studies suggest that host–microbial interactions early in development have profound effects on stress physiology and behavior by affecting the development and functioning of neuroendocrine and CNS processes relevant to the development of resilience or disease in response to stress. 
As with many processes relevant to psychiatry, the relationship between the microbiota and stress observed in animal models is bidirectional. Just as the composition of the microbiota appears to affect stress responses, stress changes the composition of the microbiota. For example, in mice the stress of maternal separation for 3 hours per day from postnatal days 2 to 12 has long-term effects on the subsequent 16S ribosomal RNA diversity of the microbiota that persists into adulthood. In addition to the ability of early life stressors to program baseline microbiota composition across the lifetime, animal studies demonstrate that acute stressors in adulthood can powerfully alter the composition of the microbiota. These alterations may then contribute to the behavioral changes observed in response to stress. For example, chronic exposure of mice to a grid flooring stressor produced significant changes in microbiota composition, which correlated with several circulating immune markers and with anxiety as assessed by closed arm entries and total time spent in the elevated plus-maze, time spent in a light/dark box, and time spent in the inner zone and total time spent in the open field test. 
The data linking the microbiota and other environmental “old friends” organisms with psychiatric illness in humans lags far behind the more conclusive evidence derived from animal models. Nonetheless, several small studies suggest that probiotics may hold impact brain function and hold promise for the treatment of behavioral disorders. Similarly, a large study in patients with advanced lung cancer found that coadministration of Mycobacterium vaccae (an environmental saprophyte) with chemotherapy improved mood, energy and related symptom domains. Finally, the rapidly expanding understanding of the relevance of human–microbial and human–parasitic interactions to disease pathogenesis suggests that in addition to symptomatic treatment, organism-based interventions may show promise, if delivered early in life, as preventive or ameliorative strategies not just for depression and anxiety but perhaps for schizophrenia and autism as well. 
Immunological Mechanisms 
Investigators have examined the immunological mechanisms through which stress may affect the immune system. In general, a stressor can alter immune function in two major ways. First, the stressor can lead to changes in the distribution of immune cells in any given part of the body. Second, stress can alter the function of the immune cells themselves. Because the immune response depends on the interplay of various immune cell 

========586========

subtypes, a redistribution of relevant cell types into or out of a particular immune compartment can directly influence the local immune response. As mentioned previously, significant and selective changes in immune cell distribution have been described in rats undergoing a mild acute stress (2 hours of restraint), including decreased numbers and percentages of cells in the peripheral blood and a concomitant increase in immune cells in the skin. It appears that cells leaving the blood during acute stress may migrate to the skin where they might be more likely to encounter pathogens, thus facilitating the immune response to pathogen exposure in wounded tissues (a distinct evolutionary advantage). 
Interestingly, data suggest that stress-induced activation of proinflammatory pathways may contribute to many of the classic immunosuppressive findings associated with stress. For example, production of NO by macrophages (an early step in inflammatory activation) has been shown to be involved in the biochemical mechanisms underlying the ability of stress to reduce lymphocyte proliferation. Both depletion of macrophages and inhibition of NO synthesis have been shown to attenuate stress-induced changes in acquired immune responses. Consistent with this finding, it is known that chronic proinflammatory cytokine production inhibits several indices of T-cell–mediated immunity. Similarly, the ability of a brief laboratory stressor to attenuate antibody responses to the antigen keyhole limpet hemocyanin is largely reversed when an antagonist to IL-1 is coadministered with the stressor. Other data demonstrate that TNF can disrupt T-cell signaling and thus impair cell- mediated immune mechanisms. In humans, depressive symptoms have been associated with increased inflammatory responses (increased plasma IL-6) to an influenza vaccine, while at the same time portending reduced antibody responses to the vaccine. Taken together, these data suggest that chronic stress may lead to a state in which innate immune mechanisms are hyperactive at the expense of functionality in acquired immune pathways. 
Neuroendocrine Mechanisms 
A number of studies have focused on neuroendocrine mechanisms by which stress may influence the immune response. The two systems that have received the most attention are the HPA axis and the ANS. 
Sympathetic Nervous System 
As discussed previously, catecholamines released by local SNS nerve fibers within immune tissues can have complex suppressive and enhancing effects on immune responses. Regarding the capacity of stress to activate innate immune responses, catecholamines have been shown to stimulate the production of proinflammatory cytokines, especially IL-6, in both the peripheral blood and CNS, and activate inflammatory signaling cascades 

========587========

including NF-κB in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (Fig. 1.13–5). In rodents, β-adrenergic receptors are critical for central production of inflammatory cytokines, whereas both α- and β-adrenergic receptors contribute to the induction of cytokines in the peripheral blood following stress. Of note, activation of catecholamines in the context of immune stimulation with LPS is associated with decreased cytokine (e.g., TNF-α) production in the spleen, an effect that can be eliminated by sympathectomy. Catecholamines via the β2 adrenergic receptor (β2AR) also reliably inhibit LPS-induced cytokine release in vitro, while having a stimulatory effect on cytokine production when administered alone. The ability of catecholamines to induce inflammation may be related in part to a “switch” that occurs whereby PKA activation leads to β-adrenergic receptor phosphorylation, which in turn switches β-receptor signaling from Gs to Gi. Gi has been associated with activation of the ras–raf signaling cascade. In addition, activation of the α1 adrenergic receptor (α1AR) may be involved in innate immune system activation following NE exposure. Regarding the effects of stress on acquired immune responses, catecholamines via activation of β2ARs have been shown to inhibit Th1 cytokines (IFN-γ), an effect that is enhanced by the presence of glucocorticoids, which can increase β2AR expression. The health-relevance of adrenergic—immune interactions has recently been highlighted by studies suggesting that beta-blockers may hold promise in the prevention of cancer or its recurrence, likely via immunomodulatory effects. 
HPA Axis 
In concert with the ANS, the HPA axis serves as a central component of the mammalian stress response system and ultimately functions to maintain bodily homeostasis via mediation of immunosuppression and immune system activation. This is exemplified by the varied effects of both CRH (an early product of HPA axis activity) and glucocorticoids (the final product of HPA axis activation). 
CRH applied within the CNS suppresses several measures of immunity, including splenic NKCA, mitogen-stimulated lymphocyte proliferation, and in vivo and in vitro antibody formation, as well as T-cell responses to T-cell receptor antibody. CRH-overproducing mice demonstrate a profound decrease in the number of B cells and severely diminished primary and memory antibody responses. These immunosuppressive effects appear to be mediated by stress response outflow pathways activated by CRH, given that blockade of the SNS abolishes CRH effects on NKCA, and adrenalectomy obviates CRH effects on lymphocyte proliferation. In addition, the B-cell decreases in CRH-overproducing mice are consistent with the marked reduction in rodent B cells observed after chronic glucocorticoid exposure. 

========588========

In contrast to its immunosuppressive properties, CRH has also been shown to enhance proinflammatory cytokine production in animals and humans when administered peripherally or within the CNS. Chronic ICV administration of CRH in rats leads to induction of IL-1β mRNA in splenocytes, and acute intravenous administration in humans has been reported to cause a fourfold increase in the induction of IL-1α. Similarly, the addition of CRH to in vitro mononuclear cell preparations induces the release of IL-1 and IL-6. Both chronic and acute CRH infusion have also been reported to increase production of IL-2 in humans and animals. In addition to potential proinflammatory activities of CRH within the CNS, peripheral production of CRH has been demonstrated in inflammatory diseases, such as arthritis and ulcerative colitis, in which CRH appears to act as a local proinflammatory agent. Indeed, CRH acting via CRH receptor 2 (CRHR2) appears to play a direct role in mediating intestinal inflammatory responses to enterotoxins. 
Of the effects of all the neurotransmitters or hormones known to modulate immune functioning, the actions of glucocorticoids, albeit complicated, are probably best understood. Glucocorticoids modulate the following: immune cell trafficking throughout the body, cell death pathways (i.e., apoptosis), and Th1/Th2 cellular immune response patterns in a manner that inhibits Th1 (cell-mediated) responses and promotes Th2 (antibody) responses. At the same time, glucocorticoids inhibit the following: arachidonic acid pathway products (e.g., prostaglandins) that mediate inflammation and sickness symptoms (e.g., fever), T-cell– and NK- cell–mediated cytotoxicity, and cytokine production and function through interaction of GRs with transcription factors (NF-κB, in particular), which in turn regulate cytokine gene expression and/or the expression of cytokine-inducible genes. 
Although glucocorticoids may actually enhance certain aspects of naturalistic immune functioning (e.g., when produced for brief periods, at low to moderate doses, or in the context of acute and/or mild stress as exemplified by DTH via effects on immune cell trafficking), they in general play a primary role in restraining excessive or prolonged inflammatory activation. This property has long been exploited for the treatment of autoimmune and other chronic inflammatory conditions, with the result that glucocorticoids remain a cornerstone of the clinical anti-inflammatory armamentarium. Consistent with their pharmacological uses, endogenous glucocorticoids have been shown to be essential for inflammatory regulation in response to immune system activation. For example, neutralization of endogenous glucocorticoid function results in enhanced pathology and mortality in animals exposed to LPS as well as other inflammatory stimulators, such as streptococcal cell wall antigen or myelin basic protein. Similarly, rodents that have been rendered glucocorticoid deficient by adrenalectomy have markedly increased death rates following 

========589========

infection with murine cytomegalovirus, an effect that arises from unrestrained activity of TNF-α. Finally, blockade of GRs within the CNS promotes profound neurodegeneration in response to LPS exposure, an effect not seen when glucocorticoid signaling is intact. 
IMMUNE SYSTEM EFFECTS ON THE CNS 
Tremendous interest has been generated in the neurosciences by the discovery that the immune system—largely via cytokine activity—is capable of exerting profound effects on CNS function (Fig. 1.13–5). Cytokines are involved in the regulation of sleep, temperature, feeding behavior, motor activity, cognition, and hedonic tone, not only in the context of infection but also in response to stress-induced and circadian changes in cytokine production. In addition, cytokines play a role in the regulation of neurotransmitter metabolism, neuroendocrine function, synaptic plasticity, and regional brain activity. 
Cytokine Effects on Behavior 
When challenged with a medical illness or chronic psychological stressor, complex interactions between the immune and nervous systems promote a constellation of immune-induced behavioral changes, alternatively referred to as “sickness syndrome” or “sickness behavior.” These behavioral changes include dysphoria, anhedonia, fatigue, social withdrawal, hyperalgesia, anorexia, altered sleep-wake patterns, and cognitive dysfunction. Although seen in response to infection, the full syndrome can be reproduced in humans and laboratory animals by administration of innate immune cytokines, such as IFN-α, IL-1, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-2. Blocking cytokine activity with IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra), α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (αMSH), IGF-1 or IL-10 diminishes or prevents the development of sickness behavior in laboratory animals, even when such behavior develops as a result of psychological stress. Evidence that cytokine-induced behavioral toxicity is related to major depression comes in part from studies showing that in humans and laboratory animals, antidepressants are able to abolish or attenuate the development of sickness behavior in response to cytokine administration (see below). 
Cytokine Effects on the Brain 
Significant evidence indicates that the CNS is a primary site for the mediation of cytokine effects on behavior. Consistent with this notion, proinflammatory cytokines released in the periphery are capable of rapidly affecting CNS function. However, because cytokines are relatively large molecules that do not readily cross the BBB, considerable attention has been paid to the mechanisms by which peripherally released cytokines communicate with the brain (Fig. 1.13–9). Five major pathways have been 

========590========

identified including (1) active transport of cytokines across the BBB; (2) access of cytokines to brain areas in which the BBB is relatively porous or “leaky,” such as the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis; (3) conversion of cytokine signals into secondary signals, such as prostaglandin or NO, by endothelial cells that line the blood vessels of the brain; (4) transmission of cytokine signals via sensory afferents of the vagus nerve; and (5) a cellular pathway, which involves the trafficking of activated immune cells, typically monocytes, to the brain vasculature and parenchyma. There are data to support each of these mechanisms, and it appears that the pathway(s) by which cytokines signal the CNS depend in part on the concentration of cytokine in the peripheral blood or local tissue compartment. Indeed, evidence suggests that high concentrations of circulating cytokines enter the brain through leaky regions of the BBB, whereas lower concentrations of cytokines signal the brain through afferent nerve fibers. The cellular pathway is the one most recently identified, perhaps because of a long-standing belief that the brain is an immune privileged organ. It is increasingly apparent that this is only partially true, and this realization is one of the most exciting recent developments in the understanding of how peripheral inflammatory activity can influence brain function. Studies have now shown that the release of TNF from inflamed peripheral tissues stimulates microglial cell production of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2 also known as monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) that then attracts monocytes to the brain. In response to social defeat stress in rodents, monocytes infiltrate multiple brain regions associated with the detection of threat (e.g., amygdala); an effect that is dependent on CCL2 and requires mobilization of monocytes from the bone marrow in dependence upon stress-induced release of catecholamines. Recently the relevance of the cellular pathway of brain-immune communication has received support from postmortem analyses of brain tissue from patients with depression who committed suicide. These brains showed increased numbers of perivascular macrophages that was associated with increased gene expression of CCL2 and allograft inflammatory factor 1 (AIF1, also known as IBA1), both of which are associated with macrophage activation and cellular trafficking. 

========591========

FIGURE 1.13–9. Schematic of possible pathways for translation of IL-1 and IL-6 into neuroendocrine signals during viral infection. Both IL-1 and IL-6 are thought to play a role in activating the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis during viral infections, and there is evidence for various pathways by which this occurs. During infection, IL-6 produced in the liver (or other abdominal viscera) may stimulate vagal afferents, thereby activating central neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), which in turn send catecholaminergic projections to the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus. Alternatively, circulating IL-1 or IL-6 (which are confined to the vascular lumen of nonfenestrated capillaries) may act indirectly by recruiting the brain’s cytokine network. In such a scenario, IL-1 could induce production of IL-6 from capillary endothelium, microvascular pericytes, or perivascular glia. Once in the brain parenchyma, IL-6 might act directly on HPA axis regulatory neurons or, more likely, modulate HPA axis activity through intermediates such as prostaglandins. In addition, IL-6 could enter the brain parenchyma passively by diffusing through the fenestrated capillaries of circumventricular organs (CVOs). Capillaries of the median eminence (ME) are also fenestrated, allowing IL-6 to travel from the vascular lumen to nerve terminals of the PVN, consequently placing this cytokine in position to mediate CRH release. The pituitary gland is intimately associated with the brain and represents another site where virus-induced cytokines could mediate ACTH release. Because the anterior pituitary is outside the blood–brain barrier, IL-1 and IL-6 presumably have direct access to pituitary corticotrophs. The foregoing mechanisms are not mutually exclusive. For example, CRH could play a permissive role for the action of IL-6 at the pituitary. (From Pearce BD, Biron CA, Miller AH. In: Buchmeier MJ, Campbell IL, eds. Advances in Virus Research. Vol. 56. New York: Academic Press; 2001, with permission.) 
Cytokine Network in the Brain 
Once peripheral signals reach the brain, it appears that in many instances these signals are translated back into cytokine signals (i.e., peripheral cytokines beget central cytokines) in part through activation of resident cytokine-producing cells such as microglia. For example, peripheral administration of either IL-1 itself, or substances such as LPS that induce IL-1, is associated with a rapid increase in IL-1 immunoreactivity and bioactivity in several brain regions, including the hippocampus and 

========592========

hypothalamus. NF-κB appears to play a pivotal role in this process, in that inhibition of NF-κB can block the elaboration of neuronal markers of activation (c-fos) as well as behavioral changes following peripheral IL-1 administration. Cytokines mediate their effects in the CNS through their receptors that are expressed throughout the brain with especially high concentrations in brain regions involved in the regulation of affect, stress responsiveness, and learning and memory including the hippocampus, amygdala, striatum, prefrontal cortex, and hypothalamus. Soluble receptors exist for many cytokines, as do decoy (inactive) receptors (such as the IL-1 receptor type II), both of which serve to limit cytokine action and are expressed in the brain. The endogenous soluble IL-1 receptor antagonist (sIL-1ra) has also been described in CNS tissues. 
Cytokines, Neurotrophic Factors, Neurogenesis, and Neurodegeneration Stress and other aversive manipulations have been repeatedly shown to suppress the production and release of neurotrophic factors, such as BDNF, that play an important role in synaptic plasticity in brain areas such as the hippocampus. Concomitant with this reduced trophic support, physical and psychological stressors suppress neurogenesis in the hippocampus, promote apoptotic cell death, and reduce density of synaptic connectivity between nerve cells. Increasing evidence suggests that proinflammatory signaling within the CNS may play an important role in these detrimental stress-induced processes. For example, social isolation stress in rodents has been shown to impair memory consolidation, suppress hippocampal neurogenesis, and reduce hippocampal BDNF levels. In separate experiments, administration of IL-1 receptor antagonist within the brain prior to the social isolation stressor has been shown to reverse each of these effects. Proinflammatory cytokines including TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6 within the CNS have also been shown to play key roles in neurodegenerative changes found in illnesses such as Alzheimer disease, multiple sclerosis, and HIV dementia as well as following a variety of insults such as ischemia, trauma, and radiation exposure. 
Cytokine Effects on Neurotransmitters 
In laboratory animals, the acute administration of a host of cytokines has been shown to produce rapid and significant alterations in the metabolism of multiple monoamines, including serotonin, NE, and dopamine (DA), in numerous brain regions. Relevant to serotonin (5HT) metabolism, activation of the enzyme indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase (IDO) is believed to be involved in cytokine-induced neurotransmitter alterations, in part by diverting the metabolism of tryptophan (the primary amino acid precursor of serotonin) into kynurenine, a compound that can be further converted into the neurotoxic metabolite quinolinic acid by activated microglia and 

========593========

infiltrating monocytes and macrophages in the brain. Quinolinic acid directly activates receptors for glutamate (NMDA) while also stimulating glutamate release and blocking glutamate reuptake by astrocytes. Quinolinic acid—like the cytokines that stimulate its production—impacts glutamate metabolism by decreasing the expression of astrocyte glutamate reuptake pumps and stimulating astrocytic glutamate release, ultimately contributing to excessive glutamate both within and outside the synapse. Binding of glutamate to extrasynaptic NMDA receptors decreases production of BDNF and increased excitotoxicity. 
Increasing evidence implicates kynurenine and its metabolites in depression in general and in inflammation-induced depression in particular. Indeed, administration of kynurenine in rodents induces depressive-like behavior in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, increased levels of quinolinic acid have been found in microglia in the ACC of suicide victims who suffered from depression. Tying these observations to inflammation are studies using IFN-α, an innate immune cytokine used to treat infectious diseases and cancer, that is notorious for causing profound behavioral disturbances, including major depression in up to 50 percent of patients depending on the dose and duration of treatment. IFN-α activates IDO leading to significant reductions in plasma concentrations of tryptophan. Several studies have shown an association between the degree of peripheral tryptophan decline and the development of depressive symptoms. However, the only study to examine associations between IFN- α–induced changes in CSF metabolites and the development of depression in humans found that the cytokine had no impact on central levels of tryptophan while significantly increasing CSF concentrations of both kynurenine and quinolinic acid. Importantly, the development of depressive symptoms correlated closely with increased CSF concentrations of both kynurenine and quinolinic acid, while showing no association with CSF tryptophan. 
Innate immune cytokines, including TNF-α and IL-1, have also been shown to increase the expression and function of synaptic reuptake pumps for serotonin (and NE) via stimulation of p38 MAPK-linked pathways. The relevance of this mechanism to depression is highlighted by a recent human study showing that (1) increased circulating levels of TNF were associated with increased brainstem serotonin reuptake availability, (2) that a cytokine antagonist lowered brainstem serotonin transporter availability, and (3) that levels of both the transporter and peripheral TNF were associated with depressive symptoms. 
Via the generation of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, inflammatory cytokines have also been found to decrease the availability of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), an enzyme cofactor essential for the synthesis of all monoamines, likely as a result of BH4 being highly sensitive to oxidation. For example, CSF concentrations of BH4 correlate negatively 

========594========

with CSF levels of IL-6 in patients treated with IFN-α, and the plasma phenylalanine to tyrosine ratio, an indirect measure of BH4 activity, correlates with CSF concentrations of DA as well as symptoms of depression in IFN-α–treated patients. Finally, treatment with the serotonin reuptake inhibitor, paroxetine, has been shown to attenuate the behavioral consequences of IFN-α administration, further highlighting the importance of effects on serotonin metabolism in cytokine-induced mood disturbances. 
In addition to the effects of chronic cytokine exposure on serotonergic transmission, it has been reported that chronic administration of IL-2 or IFN-α significantly alters DA metabolism. For example, IFN-α–treated rhesus monkeys who displayed depressive-like behavior exhibited significantly greater decreases in CSF concentrations of the DA metabolite, homovanillic acid, than monkeys who did not exhibit such behavior. Moreover, IFN-α has been shown to lead to altered metabolic activity in brain regions high in dopaminergic neurocircuits including the basal ganglia. Relevant to cytokine-induced activation of IDO, data indicate that intrastriatal administration of kynurenic acid, a breakdown product of kynurenine, dramatically reduces extracellular DA in the rat striatum. Of note, cytokine induction of NO also has been shown to inhibit the activity of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) (the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of DA) through effects on the TH coenzyme tetrahydrobiopterin. 
Although initial interest in the impact of inflammation on neurotransmitters focused on the monoamines (i.e., serotonin, NE, DA), more recent studies implicate changes in glutamate neurotransmission as being of central importance to the behavioral effects of cytokines. For example, increased levels of glutamate in the basal ganglia and dACC have been observed in patients receiving IFN-α, and higher levels of glutamate correlated with an increase in depressive symptoms. Interestingly, blocking glutamate receptors with ketamine or inhibiting IDO activity protects mice from LPS- or stress-induced depressive-like behavior, but leaves the inflammatory response intact. Taken together, these results indicate that increased activation of glutamate receptors by glutamate and/or quinolinic acid may be a common pathway through which inflammation causes depressive-like behavior. 
Regional Brain Activity 
Results from studies utilizing PET and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) provide further evidence that peripheral cytokine activity can induce centrally mediated behavioral changes. These and other imaging modalities provide a means by which various behavioral alterations can be associated with changes in the functioning of specific brain regions. For example, during an fMRI task of visuospatial attention, in comparison to controls, patients administered IFN-α exhibited significantly greater activation of the dACC. In patients, but not controls, 

========595========

the degree of dACC activation correlated highly with the number of errors made during the task. Interestingly, increased dACC activity during cognitive tasks has also been demonstrated in patients vulnerable to mood disorders, such as those with high trait anxiety, neuroticism, or OCD. IFN- α has also been shown to lead to changes in basal ganglia metabolic activity (as measured by PET) that resemble those seen in Parkinson disease. These changes also correlate with IFN-α–induced fatigue-related symptoms and may be a function of IFN-α effects on DA metabolism as indicated above. 
CYTOKINE EFFECTS ON THE NEUROENDOCRINE SYSTEM 
Effects on the HPA Axis 
Inflammatory cytokines have well-described effects on the HPA axis, including increased production of CRH and cortisol and decreased tissue sensitivity to glucocorticoid hormones. Although cytokines have been shown to be capable of activating the HPA axis at multiple levels, with a resultant increase in glucocorticoid release, evidence suggests that a major final common pathway for cytokine activation involves stimulation of CRH production in the PVN of the hypothalamus (Figs. 1.13–5 and 1.13–9). Several lines of evidence suggest that this increase in CRH activity may contribute to cytokine-induced depression/sickness behavior. CRH has behavioral effects in animals that are similar to those seen in patients with depression and/or sickness syndrome, including alterations in appetite, activity, and sleep. Patients with major depression frequently demonstrate increased CRH production, as assessed by increased CRH in CSF, increased mRNA in the PVN, downregulated frontal CRH receptors, and a blunted ACTH response to CRH challenge (likely reflecting downregulation of pituitary CRH receptors). Although never receiving approval for use, preliminary data suggest that agents that block the CRH type I receptor exhibit antidepressant and anxiolytic effects in humans. In animals, blocking CRH reverses some of the behavioral sequelae of proinflammatory cytokine administration. Indirect evidence for a role of CRH in cytokine- induced depression in humans comes from a study in which individuals that developed depression during IFN-α administration exhibited significantly higher ACTH and cortisol responses to the first injection of IFN-α compared to those of controls. These findings suggest that sensitized CRH pathways may serve as a vulnerability factor for cytokine-induced behavioral changes. 
In addition to a direct stimulatory effect on CRH within the CNS, in vivo and in vitro studies suggest that inflammation may induce resistance to circulating glucocorticoids in nervous, endocrine, and immune system tissues. This is of great potential relevance, given the high rates of relative glucocorticoid resistance in HPA axis tissues (as assessed in vivo by the dexamethasone suppression test [DST] or the dexamethasone–CRH 

========596========

stimulation test) and the immune system (as measured in vitro) found in patients with major depression and in animals and humans exposed to chronic and/or severe stressors. Supporting a role for cytokines in the induction of glucocorticoid resistance is the observation that many chronic inflammatory conditions, including steroid resistant asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and HIV infection, are characterized by a decrease in sensitivity to glucocorticoids. Of note, in HIV infection, glucocorticoid resistance has been shown to correlate with increased IFN-α plasma levels. Consistent with the ability of inflammatory cytokines to induce glucocorticoid resistance in animal models, IFN-α treatment in patients with hepatitis C virus infection has been shown to increase cortisol concentrations during the DST (consistent with glucocorticoid resistance). Increased DST cortisol levels, in turn, correlated with a more flattened diurnal cortisol slope (r = 0.39, p = 0.038) and with increased depression scores (r = 0.57, p = 0.002). Furthermore, the change in post-DEX cortisol was also associated with induction of the soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (sTNFR2; r = 0.51, p = 0.006) in response to IFN-α treatment. 
Glucocorticoid Resistance 
There are several mechanisms by which proinflammatory cytokines can disrupt GR function and contribute to glucocorticoid resistance. In addition to downregulating the expression of GR protein, proinflammatory cytokines have been found to increase the expression of the inert, β-isoform of the GR. Exposure of cells that constitutively express both GR-α (the active isoform) and GR-β to either TNF-α or IL-1β in vitro results in a marked increase in GR-β production, which is associated with the development of glucocorticoid resistance as demonstrated by a significant reduction in dexamethasone-stimulated activity of a GR-sensitive reporter gene in cytokine-treated cells. That overproduction of the negative GR-β isoform has a clinically relevant effect on glucocorticoid sensitivity is suggested by several studies documenting that patients with a variety of inflammatory and immune system disorders, including asthma, ulcerative colitis, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, whose conditions are resistant to steroid treatment, demonstrate a significantly increased GR-β-to-GR-α ratio. 
Another mechanism by which inflammatory cytokines may attenuate GR signal transduction, and hence cause glucocorticoid resistance, is through the induction of inflammatory signaling pathways that directly influence GR function. For example, adding IL-1α to an in vitro preparation of mouse fibroblast cells has been shown to suppress the ability of dexamethasone to induce translocation of the GR from the cytoplasm to its site of action in the nucleus. This IL-1α–mediated blockade of GR translocation from the cytoplasm to nucleus inhibits GR activity, as indicated by a decrease in the ability of dexamethasone to activate a 

========597========

glucocorticoid-sensitive reporter gene construct. The signaling pathways involved in this effect include p38 MAPK, which has been shown to phosphorylate the GR. Other inflammatory signaling pathways have also been shown to alter GR function, including NF-κB, JNK, and signal transducers and activators of transcription 5. 
RELEVANCE OF IMMUNE–CNS INTERACTIONS TO PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS Major Depression 
For many years, major depression was seen as a quintessential example of how stress-related disorders may decrease immunocompetence. More recently, however, it has become evident that stress also activates inflammatory pathways, even while suppressing measures of acquired immunity. Not surprisingly, studies now indicate that, in addition to immunosuppression, major depression is also frequently associated with inflammatory activation. Recent research showing that proinflammatory cytokines are capable of suppressing many of the immune measures examined in major depression may provide a mechanism to account for how chronic stress–induced inflammatory activity may give rise to depression-related suppression of in vitro functional assays, such as lymphocyte proliferation and NKCA. Building upon a range of research findings, recent theorizing has turned old conceptions of MDD as an immunocompromised state on their head by suggesting that genes promoting depression may have evolved and persisted in the human genome at least in part because in ancestral environments many physiological and behavioral aspects of depression may have actually enhanced host defense against pathogens. From this perspective, the immunosuppressive changes that have been associated with depression reflect not a pathology per se (despite potential negative impacts on health in the modern world), but rather an adaptive compromise to best utilize limited metabolic energy for immune responses most likely to have promoted survival across the wide range of environmental challenges faced by hominids during evolution. 
Effects on Acquired Immune (Lymphocyte) Responses 
Despite heterogeneity across individual studies, many studies from the period 1980 to 2010 indicate that major depression is associated with a number of immunosuppressive changes also seen in individuals without depression but who are undergoing chronic and/or severe stress (Table 1.13–10). This is hardly surprising, given the many indices of stress system hyperactivity/dysregulation that are apparent in patients with major depression, including increased CRH and cortisol production and augmented SNS/reduced parasympathetic activity (as manifested in part by increased peripheral blood catecholamines and reductions in overall and 

========598========

spectral measures of heart rate variability). Enumerative immune changes shared by major depression and chronic/severe stress include a decrease in lymphocytes, B cells, and T cells and a decrease in the ratio of CD4+ to CD8+ T-cell subsets. Shared functional changes include a decrease in NKCA and lymphocyte proliferation in response to nonspecific mitogens. Less is known about the effects of major depression in vivo (i.e., naturalistic immune functioning); however, available evidence suggests that depression may impair T-cell function in ways relevant to disease vulnerability. For example, one study reports that patients with major depression have a marked decrement in their ability to generate lymphocytes that respond to the herpes zoster virus. Also consistent with impaired T-cell function is the observation that depressed patients, especially those with melancholia, demonstrate impaired DTH. 
Because major depression is a heterogenous condition, immune changes are not uniform across all patients. In general, immunosuppression as described above tends to be most robust in patients who are older, hospitalized, or have more severe and/or melancholic types of depression. There is also some indication that certain depressive symptoms might disproportionately account for immune alterations. For example, it should be noted that patients with primary sleep disorders who are not depressed exhibit immune alterations similar to those seen in major depression. Nevertheless, data from a meta-analysis of relevant literature indicates that age, hospitalization status, depression severity, or specific symptoms of depression cannot completely account for the association between major depression and alterations in enumerative and functional immune measures. 
Effects on Innate Immune Inflammatory Responses 
Taken as a whole, currently available data suggest that patients with MDD manifest all of the cardinal features of an inflammatory response including increased proinflammatory cytokines and their receptors and increased acute phase reactants, chemokines, and soluble adhesion molecules in peripheral blood and CSF. While results are not entirely consistent between studies and associations between many inflammatory markers and depression rely on findings from a limited number of studies, meta- analyses confirm reliable associations between depression and increased plasma concentrations of IL-1B, IL-6, TNF, and CRP. Because these meta- analyses only report cross-sectional associations, they do not provide insight into causal relationships between inflammation and depression. Said simply, they do not answer the question of whether inflammation causes depression, depression causes inflammation, or both cause each other. However, a recent meta-analysis shows that increased inflammation (measured as either CRP or to a lesser degree IL-6) predicts the future 

========599========

development of depression, thereby increasing the probability inflammation does represent one causal pathway for depression, even in individuals who are otherwise medically healthy. 
In addition to meta-analysis-confirmed increases in circulating inflammatory cytokines, recent studies show that peripheral blood gene expression profiles consistent with an M1 proinflammatory phenotype and an overrepresentation of IL-6, IL-8 and type I IFN-related signaling pathways have also been described. In addition, increased expression of a variety of innate immune genes and proteins including IL-1β, IL-6, TNF, and TLR 3 and 4 has been found in postmortem brain samples of depressed suicide victims. Moreover, genes implicated in depression based on GWAS have been linked to the immune response in particular and to antipathogen mechanisms more generally. 
Interestingly, given the role of IL-6 and CRP in predicting disease outcome in both cardiovascular disorders and diabetes, as well as data indicating that inflammation may play a role in cancer, the relationship between depression and activation of the innate immune inflammatory response may provide a mechanism that explains the negative impact of depression on a number of illnesses, as well as the fact that depression predicts the later development of a range of medical illnesses including cardiovascular disease, stroke, diabetes, and dementia. Moreover, immune activation in major depression may be involved in several of the pathophysiological changes that are common in the context of depression, including bone loss, insulin resistance, cachexia, increased body temperature, and hippocampal volume loss. Interestingly, activation of innate immune responses following stress and depression may also contribute to stress- and depression-induced decreases in acquired immune (lymphocyte) responses. For example, as already discussed, administration of IL-1ra prior to stressor exposure has been found to reduce the inhibitory impact of stress on antibody production. 
There are a number of potential factors that may contribute to increased innate immune responses in depressed patients. Several lines of evidence suggest that ELA may be a primary pathway by which inflammation and depression become associated. Long-term longitudinal studies have shown that individuals subjected to ELA demonstrate increased plasma concentrations of CRP in adulthood. Interestingly, individuals with ELA but no current depression were found to have higher levels of CRP than individuals with current depression but no history of ELA. Not surprisingly individuals with both ELA and current depression were found to have the highest levels of CRP. These findings suggest that ELA may program humans (as it does other mammals) to maintain high levels of inflammation in adulthood, likely as an adaptive response to the fact that dangerous childhoods typically predicted dangerous adulthoods rife with the risk of tissue damage and ensuing death from infection. Further 

========600========

confirmation of the primacy of ELA in driving the increased inflammation seen in depression and other stress-related conditions comes from at least three other sources: (1) individuals with ELA but no current depression show the same elevated inflammatory cytokine (IL-6) responses to a laboratory psychological stress test (TSST) as do individuals with depression and ELA; (2) increased plasma IL-6 concentrations have been associated with diminished hippocampal volume in healthy, nondepressed adults and only depressed patients with a history of ELA show reduced hippocampal volume; and (3) IL-6 concentrations have been shown to predict depression 6 months later in adolescent females with family loading for depression and ELA, but not to predict depression in adolescent females with a family loading for depression but no ELA (in these subjects increased IL-6 actually nonsignificantly predicted reduced depression 6 months later). 
A second factor that has received significant attention is body mass index (BMI). BMI has been reliably correlated with peripheral markers of inflammation including IL-6, likely related in part to the capacity of adipocytes to produce inflammatory cytokines and in part to the proclivity of abdominal adipocytes to recruit cytokine-producing macrophages. Relevant in this regard, an analysis of data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey revealed that, after adjustment for a multitude of variables including BMI, there was a strong association between major depression and elevated levels of CRP in men but not women. It should be noted that obesity and ELA are not entirely separate phenomena, given that ELA strongly predicts the development of high BMI in adulthood. Nonetheless, how these two interrelated mechanisms interact in promoting the pathophysiology of depression remains to be fully elucidated. 
Despite years’ of evidence that depression is not a single disease state, the hope that a unifying mechanism for the disorder will be found dies hard. Once the link between inflammation and depression was clearly established, initial theorizing proposed the monolithic notion that depression was an inflammatory disease. However, convergent data from multiple sources now confirms that increased inflammation only occurs in a subgroup of depressed patients (frequently those with ELA and/or obesity). As discussed below, the finding that cytokine antagonism performs worse than placebo in depressed patients with low levels of inflammation strongly argues against the possibility that hyperactivity in inflammatory pathways is relevant to all—or perhaps even most—patients with major depression. 
Bipolar Disorder 
Although less extensively studied than unipolar major depression, bipolar disorder is increasingly being examined for the evidence of altered immune 

========601========

system functioning. The majority of studies conducted in recent years have focused on a variety of measures of inflammation, in keeping with the general drift of the field away from assessments of acquired immune responses toward examination of innate immune system activation. While not entirely consistent, these studies—taken as a whole—suggest that patients with bipolar disorder evince many of the immune alterations frequently observed in the context of unipolar depression. Several studies have observed that bipolar patients, especially when manic, demonstrate increased plasma concentrations of the soluble receptor for the Th1- promoting inflammatory cytokine IL2 (sIL-2R). Bipolar manic patients have also been reported to have increased plasma concentrations of IL-8 and TNF-α, as well as the acute phase reactant CRP. One study reports that stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (monocytes and lymphocytes) from acutely manic patients demonstrate increased production of IL-6 and TNF-α and reduced production of IL-4. Several studies indicate that treatments for mania, such as lithium, lower plasma concentrations of a number of cytokines. Interestingly, the available literature seems to suggest that patients in the manic phase of the disorder may be more likely than depressed patients to demonstrate increased inflammatory markers. It should not be surprising that mania—which seems the phenomenological opposite of depression—should be associated with increased inflammation, given that mania and depression have also been reported to show identical neuroendocrine and autonomic abnormalities, such as dexamethasone nonsuppression and increased sympathetic activity, both of which would be expected to promote inflammatory activity. Finally, examination of gene expression profiles in postmortem brain samples from patients with bipolar disorder revealed that 20 transcripts related to the immune response were upregulated, including members of the complement cascade as well as the TNF receptor family. 
Schizophrenia 
Inflammation produces many core symptoms of mood and anxiety disorders, but generally does not promote the types of psychotic symptoms that define schizophrenia, a disorder strongly associated in cross-sectional studies with increased inflammation. At first glance this might suggest that inflammation is less likely to cause schizophrenia than depression, but before accepting this conclusion, one consider what is meant by “cause.” While inflammatory activation in adults does not routinely produce psychosis, substantial animal data, as well as powerful circumstantial evidence in humans, suggest that increased inflammation very early in life, especially in the prenatal and perinatal periods, promotes changes in CNS development and function that significantly increase the risk of manifesting schizophrenia in adulthood. Moreover, increasing evidence suggests that 

========602========

reducing inflammation in youth at high risk for schizophrenia may prevent the transition to full-blown psychosis. 
Consistent with a role for in utero or early life inflammation in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia, multiple epidemiological studies have found associations between in utero exposure to a range of infectious organisms (e.g., influenza virus, Toxoplasma gondii, rubella virus, genital– reproductive infections) and the development of psychosis in general, and schizophrenia in particular in adult life. Although not the only potentially causative pathway, many other prenatal factors linked to an increased risk for the development of schizophrenia have also been associated with increased levels of inflammatory biomarkers during pregnancy, including obstetric complications, gestational diabetes, severe physical (e.g., famine) or psychosocial stressors, and maternal depression. Directly supporting a role for increased inflammation in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia are several longitudinal studies showing that increased maternal inflammatory biomarkers predict the development of schizophrenia in adult offspring. Although not entirely consistent in terms of the specific cytokines involved, studies have implicated elevated TNF-α and IL-8 in this association. Increased maternal levels of IL-8 in the second and third trimesters have also been found to be associated greater ventricular CSF volume in adult schizophrenia spectrum cases, as well as reduced volume of the left entorhinal cortex and right posterior cingulate. 
These human findings are strongly reinforced by animal studies demonstrating that a variety of immune stimuli (i.e., stimuli that activate both antiviral and antibacterial immunity) administered to pregnant females affect CNS development and adult functioning in ways directly relevant to schizophrenia. Various prenatal immune challenge models in rodents produce an array of adult abnormalities relevant to schizophrenia, including impaired or deficient social interaction, repetitive and stereotyped behaviors, deficient working memory, impaired executive functioning and impaired sensorimotor gating as assessed by prepulse inhibition. Offspring exposed to certain highly pathogenic viruses in utero have reduced numbers of dopaminergic neurons and behavioral abnormalities in adulthood. These viral strains show strong tropism for dopaminergic neurons in vitro, with resultant activation of the lynchpin intracellular inflammatory molecule NF-κB and cellular apoptosis. Consistent with these data from rodents, exposure of pregnant macaques to low-dose LPS was found to produce an array of behavioral abnormalities in the offspring, including deficient prepulse inhibition. 
While human studies linking in utero or early postnatal inflammation to the later development of schizophrenia remain correlative, animal studies strongly suggest that inflammatory mediators cause the long-term effects of immune stimulation early in development on CNS morphology and function. For example, the long-term disease-relevant effects of 

========603========

administration of either IL-1β or IL-6 are abrogated if these cytokines are delivered in concert with strategies that block their biological effects (e.g., antibody against IL-6 or IL-1-receptor antagonist). Similarly, mice genetically modified to overexpress the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 demonstrated significant reductions in behavioral abnormalities induced by in utero exposure to poly I:C (an immune stimuli that mimics many aspects of viral infection). Finally, rats exposed to LPS in the neonatal period had disrupted patterns of spontaneous synchronized cortical activity known to be essential for the formation of neural networks and in the regulation of neuronal survival and developmentally appropriate apoptosis (programmed cell death). These effects, which are highly relevant to both schizophrenia and autism, were mediated by TNF-α derived from activated microglia cells, consistent with increasing evidence that immune molecules in general, and microglial activity in particular, is essential for many aspects of normal neural development, including neurogenesis, neuronal migration, axon guidance, synapse formation, and activity-dependent refinement of circuits. Importantly, blockade of TNF-α activity reversed the effects of neonatal LPS on neural firing patterns and apoptosis. 
Both animal and human data suggest that the long-term impact of inflammatory activation on the developing CNS does not stop at birth but persists across early life. For example, large, population-based epidemiological studies have found that individuals with a history of an autoimmune condition early in life have a 29 to 45 percent increased risk of subsequently developing schizophrenia. A history of severe early life infection (as indexed by hospitalization) increased the risk of subsequent schizophrenia by 60 percent, and the effects of autoimmunity and infection were synergistic when combined in the same individuals, increasing the risk of subsequent schizophrenia by 125 percent, with these associations remaining significant after adjustment for other potentially confounding risk factors. Animal studies are generally consistent with these human findings in suggesting that inflammatory stimulation very early in postnatal life has similar long-term effects to stimulation in utero. 
The data linking various surrogates for immune activation (including measures of inflammatory biomarkers) remain circumstantial, but animal studies have been far more rigorous in demonstrating that inflammatory mediators drive the long-term effects of immune stimulation early in development on CNS morphology and function. For example, the long- term disease-relevant effects of administration of either IL-1β or IL-6 are abrogated if these cytokines are delivered in concert with strategies that block their biological effects (e.g., antibody against IL-6 or IL-1-receptor antagonist). Similarly, mice genetically modified to overexpress the anti- inflammatory cytokine IL-10 demonstrated significant reductions in behavioral abnormalities induced by in utero exposure to poly I:C. Finally, rats exposed to LPS in the neonatal period had disrupted patterns of 

========604========

spontaneous synchronized cortical activity known to be essential for the formation of neural networks and in the regulation of neuronal survival and developmentally appropriate apoptosis (programmed cell death). These effects, which are highly relevant to both schizophrenia and autism, were mediated by TNF-α derived from activated microglia cells, consistent with increasing evidence that immune molecules in general, and microglial activity in particular, is essential for many aspects of normal neural development, including neurogenesis, neuronal migration, axon guidance, synapse formation, and activity-dependent refinement of circuits. Importantly, blockade of TNF-α activity reversed the effects of neonatal LPS on neural firing patterns and apoptosis. 
Although inflammatory activation only rarely produces psychotic symptoms in humans (i.e., less than 1 percent of patients receiving IFN-α develop psychosis), patients with schizophrenia have been shown in numerous studies to demonstrate increases in a number of immune biomarkers. Most commonly reported (and confirmed by meta-analysis) have been elevations in IL-6, IL-2, and sIL-2R. Importantly, these alterations have been found in first-episode patients, strongly suggesting that immune activation is associated with the disease itself, rather than merely with its treatment or with other factors (such as obesity) that ensue as the disease progresses. In addition to these cytokines, a meta-analysis of over 85,000 individuals found modest, but reliable increases in plasma CRP in patients with schizophrenia compared to healthy controls, with CRP levels correlating with positive, but not negative symptoms, and with antipsychotic treatment having no effect on CRP levels. 
Schizophrenia has also been associated with alterations in T-cell function and number. Summarizing results from 16 studies, a recent meta- analysis found that schizophrenia was characterized by increased absolute levels of total lymphocytes, as well as CD3 and CD4 T cells. In drug-naïve first-episode psychosis the CD4/CD8 ratio was significantly increased and the percentage of CD3 cells was significantly decreased. A shift in the Th1/Th2 cytokine profile has also been reported in schizophrenia, although results are complex. For example, a recent meta-analysis found a reduced Th1/Th2 balance in serum but an increased Th1/Th2 balance based on ex vivo stimulation testing in patients with schizophrenia. Further evidence of T-cell involvement in at least some cases of schizophrenia comes from mounting evidence that schizophrenic patients have increased autoantibodies when compared to healthy controls. For example, a meta- analysis of 81 studies found an increased prevalence of positive titers for 20 different autoantibodies in patients with schizophrenia compared to controls; however, there was marked heterogeneity between studies and correlations between autoantibodies and symptom profiles were inconsistent. 
Perhaps the strongest evidence linking the immune system to the 

========605========

pathophysiology of schizophrenia comes from the multiple large GWAS that have consistently identified immune genes as contributing to disease risk. 
Autism 
Autism has been associated with a number of immune abnormalities including unbalanced Th1/Th2 cytokine production, reduced NK and T-cell activation, and increased TNF-α and IL-12 especially in patients with comorbid gastrointestinal symptoms. In addition, patients with autism exhibit increased autoimmune-based genes including HLA-DRB1*04 and the complement C4B null allele. More recent meta-analytic studies in ASD report increased circulating concentrations of IL-1-β, IL-6, IL8, IFN-γ and monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-1 and reduced concentrations of TGF-β. 
Still, while a convincing case can be made for a significant immune component to autism, the relationship of immune abnormalities to the neurobehavioral symptoms of the disease remains controversial. The claim that autism is triggered by childhood vaccines has not been substantiated by recent epidemiological studies, and immune-based therapies for autism have not been reliably effective. However, in support of a causative role for the immune system at least some cases of autism, a large epidemiological study from Denmark found that in utero exposure to maternal influenza infection associated with a twofold increased risk and prolonged episodes of maternal fever caused a threefold increased risk of infantile autism. Similarly, maternal autoimmune disease has been shown via meta-analysis to increase the risk of autism in children by 34 percent. 
Animal studies also support the possibility that inflammatory activation either in utero or early in life may increase the risk for autism. For example, exposure of pregnant macaques to low-dose LPS resulted in significantly increased brain volume in the affected offspring, a finding repeatedly observed in human children with autism. It is increasingly recognized that immune processes play central roles in brain development. Perhaps the most striking example of the power of immune processes to both guide and disrupt neural development in ways relevant to autism comes from a study using a mouse model of maternal immune activation (MIA) that produces a variety of behaviors in offspring relevant to autism in humans. Prenatal immune stimulation reduced the number of circulating CD4+ TCRβ+ Forkhead Box 3 (Foxp3)+ CD25+ Tregs, while increasing IL-6 and IL-17 production by CD4+ T cells. Transplantation of immunologically normal bone marrow into irradiated MIA offspring reversed the autism-relevant behavioral abnormalities observed in these animals, even though the heads of these animals were protected from any direct effects of the radiation. These findings are consistent with work demonstrating that peripheral T 

========606========

and monocytic cell functioning—specifically the homing of these cells to the meninges of the brain in response to psychosocial stress—is required for learning in rodents in a process that drives hippocampal BDNF production via an IL-4-dependent mechanism. 
Other Disorders 
Far less attention has been given to the role of immunity in general, and to inflammation in particular, in the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric conditions other than major depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and autism. Nonetheless, increasing evidence suggests that increased inflammation is a hallmark of nearly all types of psychiatric disturbance. Indeed, it is intriguing that no currently defined psychiatric condition has been reliably associated with reduced levels of inflammatory biomarkers. 
Consistent with the ability of stress to activate inflammatory pathways (as discussed above), many studies now report that PTSD is associated with increased peripheral inflammatory biomarkers, regardless of whether the PTSD results from civilian or military trauma. Moreover, veterans with PTSD show elevated inflammatory biomarkers compared to veterans without PTSD who were exposed to similar degree of combat. PTSD has also been associated with increased ex vivo stimulated cytokine release from peripheral blood mononuclear cells and with increased intracellular NF-κB. Importantly, cytokine levels (i.e., IL-6) immediately following a stressor have been found to predict the later development of PTSD symptoms, and predeployment plasma levels of CRP predict the presence/severity of PTSD symptoms following combat exposure. 
There appears to be a spectrum of pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections (PANDAS), presumably as a result of antineuronal antibodies that develop following infection with group A β-hemolytic streptococcal infections, as exemplified by Sydenham chorea. Considering that children with Sydenham chorea frequently exhibit obsessive–compulsive symptoms, emotional lability, and hyperactivity, In particular, sudden onset of OCD, tics, ADHD, and other psychiatric syndromes has been characterized in children following infection with group A β-hemolytic streptococcus. Moreover, children with repeated streptococcal infections exhibit higher rates of distal choreiform movements and behaviors consistent with ADHD. Interestingly, recent data suggest that OCD more generally may also be associated with increased levels of a number of cytokines, including IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10 and TNF. 
THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS 
The bidirectional nature of CNS–immune system interactions implies the therapeutic possibility that agents known to positively alter stress system 

========607========

activity might benefit immune functioning and, conversely, that agents that modulate immune functioning may be of potential benefit in the treatment of neuropsychiatric disturbance, especially in the context of medical illness. Increasing evidence supports both hypotheses. 
Antidepressants and the Immune System 
Emerging data indicate that in animals and humans, antidepressants attenuate or abolish behavioral symptoms induced by inflammatory cytokine exposure. For example, pretreatment of rats with either imipramine or fluoxetine (a TCA and SSRI, respectively) for 5 weeks prior to endotoxin administration significantly attenuated endotoxin-induced decrements in saccharine preference (commonly accepted as a measure for anhedonia), as well as weight loss, anorexia, and reduced exploratory, locomotor, and social behavior. Similarly, several studies in humans suggest that antidepressants are able to ameliorate mood disturbances in the context of chronic cytokine therapies, especially if given prophylactically prior to cytokine exposure. For example, the SSRI paroxetine significantly decreased the development of major depression in patients receiving high doses of IFN-α for malignant melanoma. Following 3 months of IFN-α, 45 percent of patients receiving placebo developed major depression, compared to only 11 percent in patients receiving paroxetine. Moreover, patients on placebo had significantly higher rates of IFN-α treatment discontinuation secondary to depression when compared to patients receiving paroxetine, indicating that by blocking cytokine- induced mood disturbance, antidepressants significantly contribute to improved treatment adherence. Interestingly, in a dimensional analysis, it became apparent that paroxetine prevented major depression by blocking mood, anxiety, and cognitive symptoms. In contrast, the antidepressant was no more effective than placebo in preventing neurovegetative symptoms such as fatigue and anorexia. These findings raise the possibility that major depression in the context of chronic cytokine exposure may represent a phenomenon comprised of at least two separate syndromes mediated by two distinct pathways: an affective syndrome that is antidepressant responsive and a neurovegetative syndrome that is antidepressant resistant. The importance of both these syndromes is highlighted by the somewhat contradictory findings that, on the one hand, affective, but not somatic symptoms, are associated with depression- associated increases in mortality in hospitalized, medically ill patients and with increased viral load in patients with HIV, while on the other hand that neurovegetative, but not affective symptoms, predict the progression of atherosclerosis in patients with coronary artery disease. 
Many studies indicate that, in general, antidepressants decrease immune system responsivity in ways that are likely to be of benefit in the context of immune activation. A number of antidepressants have been 

========608========

shown to diminish proinflammatory cytokine production, not just from peripheral immune cells but also within the CNS, where, for example, desipramine has been reported to attenuate TNF-α release within the locus coeruleus. Rolipram, a phosphodiesterase type 4 inhibitor, has antidepressant properties and has been shown to suppress NF-κB activity, which is a primary pathway for the induction of genes that encode proinflammatory cytokine production. Concomitant with attenuating proinflammatory cytokine production, antidepressants enhance production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. Antidepressants are also known to enhance activity in intracellular second messenger pathways (such as the cAMP cascade) known to suppress production of proinflammatory cytokines. Anti-inflammatory effects have also been observed for other modalities with antidepressant activity including ECT and exercise. 
Finally, antidepressants also reverse the relative glucocorticoid resistance found in many patients with major depression, suggesting that antidepressants may diminish activity in CRH and immune pathways by restoring normal glucocorticoid-mediated feedback inhibition. 
Importantly, conventional antidepressant medications act by increasing synaptic availability of monoamines and increasing neurogenesis through induction of BDNF79. Therefore, cytokines such as IL-β and TNF serve to undermine these activities as they decrease the synaptic availability of monoamines while also decreasing BDNF and increasing extracellular glutamate, which is not a target of conventional antidepressant therapy. These cytokine-driven effects may explain the association between inflammation and treatment nonresponse in patients with depression. 
Immune Modulators and Psychiatric Illness 
A logical correlate to the idea that antidepressants modulate inflammation is that agents with the capacity to directly diminish cytokine production may be of value in stress-related conditions, such as depression. Because both schizophrenia and autism appear to be reliably associated with increased inflammation, anti-inflammatory agents are of interest in these disorders, too. 
In animal models, endogenous inhibitors of proinflammatory cytokines, such as the sIL-1ra, have been reported to attenuate or abolish sickness symptoms following endotoxin or cytokine administration. In addition to direct anti-inflammatory activities, sIL-1ra also blocks many of the sequelae of psychological stress in rodents. For example, direct injection of sIL-1ra blunts HPA axis responses to psychological stressors, such as restraint, and prevents stress from causing learned helplessness (a frequent animal model for depression). Of note, mice whose TNF-α receptor genes have been knocked out exhibit an antidepressant phenotype and are resistant to anxiety conditioning paradigms and virus-induced anxiety behaviors. As discussed above, inflammatory mediators likely induce 

========609========

depression, at least in part, by impacting glutamatergic signaling in the CNS. Given this, it is intriguing that ketamine administration prevents more specific depressive-like symptoms following LPS, while having no effect on sickness behavior per se. However, it is not currently known whether ketamine is more effective in depressed patients with increased inflammatory biomarkers than in patients without evidence of increased immune activation. 
Despite high initial hopes, recent meta-analytic explorations of the potential antidepressant effects of anti-inflammatory agents provide a mixed picture in terms of therapeutic potential. Studies of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) as augmenting agents for SSRIs in major depression are either methodologically weak or have failed to be replicated and epidemiological data suggest that while some NSAIDs may be of benefit others may actually increase the prevalence of psychiatric symptoms. No evidence suggests that NSAIDs have appreciable efficacy as monotherapy for depression. In addition to these weak empirical findings, it should be noted that NSAIDs have a number of “off-target” anti- and prodepressant effects making them less than ideal as probes for testing the idea that blocking inflammation holds antidepressant promise. 
Because cytokine antagonists have no appreciable “off-target” effects they are superior to NSAIDs and other less specific agents for examining the potential of anti-inflammatory strategies for the treatment of major depression. But as with NSAIDs, results of cytokine antagonist trials are complex. With one exception, their antidepressant potential has only been examined in patients with underlying disease states associated with increased inflammation (e.g., psoriasis, Crohn disease). Two meta-analyses find that cytokine antagonists (thus far only TNF antagonists have been examined) reduce depressive symptoms when compared to placebo in these inflamed patients, with the caveat that effect sizes are generally small, likely because baseline rates of depressive symptoms were low in these medically ill populations. While intriguing, these findings only point to the logical conclusion that lowering inflammation in inflamed patients improves their mood—either because inflammation was driving depressive symptoms or because the cytokine antagonists treated the underlying immune conditions caused by inflammation and the improvement in depression was secondary to reductions in primary disease burden. Left unanswered by these studies is the question of whether cytokine antagonists might work as “all-purpose” antidepressants in medically healthy patients with major depression, as would be predicted by the idea that depression is an inflammatory condition. 
To answer this question, a randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled study was conducted in medically healthy patients with treatment resistant depression using the TNF antagonist infliximab. Sixty participants were randomized to receive either three infusions of infliximab 

========610========

or a salt water placebo, with infusions delivered at baseline, study week 2 and study week 6 and clinician- and self-report–based assessments of depressive symptoms and related constructs obtained at baseline (i.e., pretreatment) and at study weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12. Enrolled subjects were either off antidepressants or on a stable antidepressant regimen for at least 4 weeks prior to study entry without appreciable 
clinical response. 
correlation 
was 
observed 
high-sensitivity 
CRP 
and 
baseline 
levels 
of 
peripheral 
response 
to 
infliximab. 
With the caveat that placebo response rates were high (50 percent), the results from the study were unequivocal. The groups were as close to each other in depressive symptom outcome as could be expected by chance (i.e., p = 0.92), and—in fact—placebo outperformed infliximab on a numeric basis. Thus, results of this study do not suggest that anti-inflammatory agents have general antidepressant effects. However, consistent with their efficacy for depressive symptoms in autoimmune conditions, a striking 
between 
inflammatory biomarkers (CRP and TNF) and clinical outcomes: a linear relationship was observed between increasing plasma concentrations of 
antidepressant 
Participants with CRP levels greater than 5 mg/L did better with infliximab than placebo, with a medium effect size of 0.41, which is similar to the efficacy of antidepressants against placebo in most studies. However, participants with hs-CRP below 5 mg/L did better on placebo than infliximab (effect size 0.82). Importantly, in participants with hs-CRP levels about 5 mg/L the response to infliximab was not the result of only impacting “sickness symptoms” such as fatigue, but resulted from a reduction in the core MDD symptoms of depressed mood and anhedonia, and from other symptoms often considered “emotional” as opposed to “somatic,” including suicidal ideation and psychic anxiety. 
Behavioral Interventions and Immunity 
It has been known for years that psychosocial factors can mitigate or worsen the effects of stress, not only on immune functioning but also on the long-term outcomes of medical conditions in which the immune system is known to play a role. Therefore, behavioral interventions aimed at maximizing protective psychosocial factors might be predicted to have a beneficial effect, not only in terms of mitigating the effect of stress on 
immune 
functioning 
but 
perhaps 
also 
on diminishing emotional 
disturbances that arise in the context of immune system dysregulation 
(Table 1.13–10). 
Two factors that have been repeatedly identified as protective against stress-induced immune alterations are social support and the ability to see stressors as being to some degree under the individual’s control. In this regard, a recent study that conducted a genome-wide scan to assess gene expression activity in socially isolated versus nonisolated individuals found 

========611========

that social isolation was associated with increased activation of a number of proinflammatory, cytokine-related pathways and reduced activity in anti- inflammatory cytokine pathways, as well as in the GR, which plays an important role in neuroendocrine control of inflammatory processes. Interestingly, the two types of psychotherapy most often examined in illnesses associated with immune dysregulation are group therapy, which provides social support, and CBT, which provides cognitive reframing techniques aimed at enhancing one’s sense of agency (and hence control). In addition to treating depression, both cognitive behavioral and group therapy have also been shown to diminish IFN-γ production in patients with multiple sclerosis over a 12-week treatment course. Finally, although mixed results have been obtained across multiple trials, two well-designed studies have indicated that group therapy can prolong survival in cancer patients, an effect that was correlated in one study with enhancement of NKCA in patients with malignant melanoma. 
Such interventions may limit the impact of stress on the immune response and may have direct effects on neuroendocrine–immune interactions. Indeed, psychological interventions such as cognitive- behavioral stress management and mindfulness-based stress reduction have been shown to alleviate psychological distress in breast cancer patients, while increasing lymphocyte proliferative responses and normalizing diurnal cortisol secretion. There is also evidence that aerobic exercise can lead to reductions in inflammatory markers in cancer survivors. The possibility that behavioral interventions such as exercise (and possibly other behavioral therapies) may attenuate cancer-related comorbidities is an important avenue for future research. 
REFERENCES 
Abbas AK, Lichtman AH, Pillai S. Cellular and Molecular Immunology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2012. 
Bierhaus A, Wolf J, Andrassy M, Rohleder N, Humpert PM. A mechanism converting psychosocial stress into mononuclear cell activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;100:1920–1925. 
Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Mind-altering microorganisms: the impact of the gut microbiota on brain and behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012;13:701–712. 
Danese A, Moffitt TE, Pariante CM, Ambler A, Poulton R. Elevated inflammation levels in depressed adults with a history of childhood maltreatment. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2008;65:409–415. 
Dantzer R, O’Connor JC, Freund GG, Johnson RW, Kelley KW. From inflammation to sickness and depression: when the immune system subjugates the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008;9:46–56. 
Dantzer R, Walker AK. Is there a role for glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity in inflammation- induced depression? J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2014;121:925–932. 

========612========

Ford DE, Erlinger TP. Depression and C-reactive protein in US adults: data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:1010–1014. Frank MG, Baratta MV, Sprunger DB, Watkins LR, Maier SF. Microglia serve as a neuroimmune substrate for stress-induced potentiation of CNS proinflammatory cytokine responses. Brain Behav Immun. 2007;21:47–59. 
Glaser R, Kiecolt-Glaser JK. Stress-induced dysfunction: implications for health. Nat Rev Immunol. 2005;5:243–251. 
Glezer I, Simard AR, Rivest S. Neuroprotective role of the innate immune system by microglia. Neuroscience. 2007;147:867–883. 
Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Carroll JE. Sleep disturbance, sleep duration, and inflammation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies and experimental sleep deprivation. Biol Psychiatry. 2015; Epub. 
*Köhler O, Benros ME, Nordentoft M, Farkouh ME, Iyengar RL, Mors O, et al. Effect of anti- inflammatory treatment on depression, depressive symptoms, and adverse effects: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71:1381–1391. Koo JW, Duman RS. IL-1beta is an essential mediator of the antineurogenic and anhedonic effects of stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105.751–756. 
*Louveau A, Harris TH, Kipnis J. Revisiting the mechanisms of CNS immune privilege. Trends Immunol. 2015;36:569–577. 
*Miller AH, Raison CL. The role of inflammation in depression: from evolutionary imperative to modern treatment target. Nat Rev Immun. 2016;16(1):22–34. 
Miller GE, Chen E, Sze J, Marin T, Arevalo JM. A functional genomic fingerprint of chronic stress in humans: blunted glucocorticoid and increased NF-kappaB signaling. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;64:266–272. 
Müller N, Weidinger E, Leitner B, Schwarz MJ. The role of inflammation in schizophrenia. Front Neurosci. 2015;9:372. 
Musselman DL, Lawson DH, Gumnick JF, Manatunga AK, Penna S. Paroxetine for the prevention of depression induced by high-dose interferon alfa. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:961– 966. 
Nance DM, Sanders VM. Autonomic innervation and regulation of the immune system (1987– 2007). Brain Behav Immun. 2007;21:736–745. 
Pace TW, Hu F, Miller AH. Cytokine-effects on glucocorticoid receptor function: relevance to glucocorticoid resistance and the pathophysiology and treatment of major depression. Brain Behav Immun. 2007;21:9–19. 
Pace TW, Mletzko TC, Alagbe O, Musselman DL, Nemeroff CB. Increased stress-induced inflammatory responses in male patients with major depression and increased early life stress. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:1630–1633. 
Popovich PG, Longbrake EE. Can the immune system be harnessed to repair the CNS? Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008;9:481–493. 
Raison CL, Miller AH. The evolutionary significance of depression in Pathogen Host Defense (PATHOS-D). Mol Psychiatry. 2013;18:15–37. 
Raison CL, Rutherford RE, Woolwine BJ, Shuo C, Schettler P, Drake DF, et al. A randomized controlled trial of the tumor necrosis factor antagonist infliximab for treatment-resistant 

========613========

depression: the role of baseline inflammatory biomarkers. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013;70:31–41. Rook GA, Raison CL, Lowry CA. Microbiota, immunoregulatory old friends and psychiatric disorders. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;817:319–356. 
Rosenblat JD, Brietzke E, Mansur RB, Maruschak NA, Lee Y, McIntyre RS. Inflammation as a neurobiological substrate of cognitive impairment in bipolar disorder: evidence, pathophysiology and treatment implications. J Affect Disord. 2015;188:149–159. 
Savitz J, Drevets WC, Wurfel BE, Ford BN, Bellgowan PS, Victor TA, et al. Reduction of kynurenic acid to quinolinic acid ratio in both the depressed and remitted phases of major depressive disorder. Brain Behav Immun. 2015;46:55–59. 
*Slavich GM, Cole SW. The emerging field of human social genomics. Clin Psychol Sci. 2013;1:331–348. 
Steptoe A, Hamer M, Chida Y. The effects of acute psychological stress on circulating inflammatory factors in humans: a review and meta-analysis. Brain Behav Immun. 2007;21:901 
*Tracey KJ. Physiology and immunology of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway. J Clin Invest. 2007;117:289–296. 
Valkanova V, Ebmeier KP, Allan CL. CRP, IL-6 and depression: a systematic review and meta- analysis of longitudinal studies. J Affect Disor. 2013;150(3):736–744. 
Zorilla E, Luborsky L, McKay J, Roesnthal R. The relationship of depression and stressors to immunological assays: a meta-analytic review. Brain Behav Immun. 2001;15:199–226. 

========614========

▲ 1.14 Chronobiology 
MEGAN A. MILLER, M.S., KATHRYN A. ROECKLEIN, PH.D., AND IGNACIO PROVENCIO, PH.D. 
Chronobiology is the study of biological time. The rotation of the Earth about its axis imposes a 24-hour cyclicity upon the biosphere. Although it is widely accepted that organisms have evolved to occupy geographical niches that can be defined by the three spatial dimensions, it is less appreciated that organisms have also evolved to occupy temporal niches that are defined by the fourth dimension of time. Much like light represents a small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, the 24-hour periodicity represents a small time domain within the spectrum of temporal biology. A broad range of frequencies exist throughout biology, ranging from millisecond oscillations in ocular field potentials to the 17-year cycle of emergence seen in the periodic cicada (Magicicada spp.). While these differing periodicities all fall within the realm of chronobiology, circadian (Latin: circa, about; dies, day) rhythms that have a period of about 1 day are among the most extensively studied and best understood biological rhythms. 
A defining feature of circadian rhythms is that they persist in the absence of time cues and are not simply driven by the 24-hour environmental cycle. Experimental animals housed for several months under constant darkness, temperature, and humidity continue to exhibit robust circadian rhythms. Maintenance of rhythmicity in a “timeless” environment points to the existence of an internal biological timing system that is responsible for generating these endogenous rhythms. 
The site of the primary circadian oscillator in mammals, including humans, is the SCN, located in the anterior hypothalamus (Fig. 1.14–1). The mean circadian period generated by the human SCN is approximately 24.18 hours. Like a watch that ticks 10 minutes and 48 seconds too slowly per day, an individual with such a period gradually comes out of synchrony with the astronomical day. In slightly more than 3 months, a normally diurnal human would be in antiphase to the day–night cycle and thus would become transiently nocturnal. Therefore, a circadian clock must be reset on a regular basis to be effective at maintaining the proper phase relationships of behavioral and physiological processes within the context of the 24-hour day. 
Although factors such as temperature and humidity exhibit daily fluctuations, the environmental parameter that most reliably corresponds to the period of Earth’s rotation around its axis is the change in illuminance associated with the day–night cycle. Accordingly, organisms have evolved to use this daily change in light levels as a time cue or zeitgeber (German: 

========615========

zeit, time; geber, giver) to reset the endogenous circadian clock. Regulation of the circadian pacemaker through the detection of changes in illuminance requires a photoreceptive apparatus that communicates with the central oscillator. In humans, as in other mammals, this apparatus is known to reside in the eyes, because surgical removal of the eyes renders an animal incapable of resetting its clock in response to light. 
The circadian clock drives many rhythms, including rhythms in behavior, core body temperature, sleep, feeding, drinking, and hormonal levels. One such circadian-regulated hormone is the indoleamine, melatonin. Melatonin synthesis is controlled through a multisynaptic pathway from the SCN to the pineal gland. Serum levels of melatonin become elevated at night and return to baseline during the day. The nocturnal rise in melatonin is a convenient marker of circadian phase. Exposure to light elicits two distinct effects on the daily melatonin profile. First, light acutely suppresses elevated melatonin levels, immediately decreasing them to baseline levels. Second, light shifts the phase of the circadian rhythm of melatonin synthesis. Because melatonin can be assayed easily, and reflects any perturbation of the clock, it can be used as an output measure to study the regulation of the central circadian pacemaker. 

========616========

FIGURE 1.14–1. The human suprachiasmatic nucleus. Top: Nissl stain of section through the human hypothalamus. The suprachiasmatic nuclei are indicated by arrows and are located dorsal to the optic chiasm (OC). Bottom: Autoradiograph of same section. Specific binding of a radioiodinated analog of melatonin is indicated by the darkening of the 

========617========

suprachiasmatic nuclei. (From Reppert SM, Weaver DR, Rivkees SA, Stopa EG. Putative melatonin receptors in a human biological clock. Science. 1988;242:78, with permission.) 
Taken together, the circadian axis of mammals can be divided into three distinct functional components: (1) a master pacemaker situated in the SCN, (2) a photoreceptive input to the SCN that originates in the eye, and (3) the myriad of rhythmic outputs that provide insight into the clockwork of the circadian pacemaker. 
CIRCADIAN PACEMAKERS 
Anatomy 
The mammalian circadian system is organized as a hierarchy of pacemakers. The SCN is the master oscillator that orchestrates a multitude of oscillators outside of the SCN. These peripheral oscillators are found in a wide range of peripheral tissues including the kidney, liver, lung, and other sites in the brain. Most of the current understanding of the SCN and its peripheral oscillators is derived from rodent studies. 
The SCN are small, paired, hypothalamic structures situated immediately dorsal to the optic chiasm. They were recognized as the site of the primary circadian pacemaker because lesions in the ventral hypothalamus that encompassed the SCN rendered rodents behaviorally arrhythmic. Transplantation of SCN tissue from mutant hamsters that expressed abnormally short circadian periods into the brains of SCN- lesioned host hamsters with normal prelesion circadian periods results in a transfer of the abnormally short period. This transfer of a distinguishing parameter of the circadian clock indicates that the SCN is a true biological pacemaker and not simply a neural relay for a rhythm generator located elsewhere in the brain. 
Metabolically, the SCN show peak activity during the subjective day. This increased level of metabolism is paralleled by the increased electrophysiological activity evident from brain slice recordings. SCN neurons that are isolated and maintained in culture for several days also continue to show approximately 24-hour rhythms in action potential frequency (Fig. 1.14–2). 
This observation indicates that the rhythmicity of the SCN is not an emergent property of the system but rather an inherent feature of individual SCN neurons. Molecular studies have confirmed that the oscillatory machinery of the SCN is indeed contained within the individual neurons. It is likely, however, that the general output of the SCN is a result of coupling between individual cellular oscillators, resulting in a coordinated rhythmic signal. The prevailing view of SCN oscillator organization is that the individually oscillating neurons are largely synchronized and the composite output of the SCN reflects the mean phase of these oscillators. Recent studies, however, have shown that discrete 

========618========

phase groupings of oscillators exist. The relative contributions of these “phase ensembles” to the overall rhythmic output of the SCN are likely to be modulated by entraining agents such as light. In addition to the variable contributions of the ensembles to the global output of the SCN, the amplitude and relative phase of the ensembles may also be modified by entraining agents. The potential to manipulate so many parameters of these sets of oscillatory neurons affords a tremendous degree of flexibility with respect to clock-resetting mechanisms. Furthermore, the relative phasing of heterogeneous oscillator groups provides a strategy by which seasonality can be transduced into a biological signal. 
FIGURE 1.14–2. Circadian rhythm in the firing rate of an individual suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) neuron. Top: Firing rate of an individual action potential. Bottom: Extracellular recording traces corresponding to the labeled times indicated during day 2 in 

========619========

the top panel. (From Welsh DK, Logothetis DE, Meister M, Reppert SM. Individual neurons dissociated from rat suprachiasmatic nucleus express independently phased circadian firing rhythms. Neuron. 1995;14:697, with permission.) 
The neurons of the SCN are among the smallest neurons in the entire brain. They possess short dendrites that are not extensively branched. A consequence of these cellular dimensions is the high packing density of the nucleus. Virtually every neuron in the SCN is immunopositive for the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. Subdivisions of the SCN have also been defined according to immunohistochemical and neural tract tracing criteria. Perhaps the most obvious anatomical subdivision is the core of the SCN, defined by the presence of calbindin-positive neurons. The remainder of the SCN that surrounds the core is considered the shell. Discrete functions have not been firmly assigned to subdivisions of the SCN, but the afferent and efferent projections to and from these subdivisions are beginning to provide insights into their putative functions. 
Afferent Projections 
The retinohypothalamic tract is the primary afferent input to the SCN. It originates in the retina from a small subset of retinal ganglion cells and innervates the entire volume of the SCN, although the specific subregions of the SCN that are most heavily innervated vary among different species of mammals. 
The excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate is the primary neurotransmitter of the retinohypothalamic tract, with PACAP modulating glutamate’s effect in the SCN. Glutamate receptor antagonists can block the effects of light on the circadian axis, illustrating the importance of this neurotransmitter in conveying photic information from the retina to the SCN. 
The SCN also receives afferents from the ipsilateral intergeniculate leaflet (IGL), a subnucleus of the lateral geniculate complex. The IGL, in turn, receives input directly from the retina, thus providing a secondary indirect pathway from the retina to the SCN. NPY is the predominant transmitter of the IGL-to-SCN projection. Although the function of the IGL is not well established, it is purported to be involved in encoding environmental luminance. Other, less understood projections to the SCN also are known to exist. 
Most prominent among these is a distinct serotonergic projection from the midbrain raphe. Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) is known to modulate light’s effect on SCN function. Systemic administration of a 5- HT1B receptor agonist before the application of a light pulse attenuates light-induced phase shifts of circadian locomotor activity in hamsters and mice. Light-induced expression of Fos (an immediate early gene) within the SCN is also attenuated with this agonist. 5-HT7, a novel serotonin receptor 

========620========

subclass, and has been implicated in mediating serotonin’s modulation of the glutamatergic input to the SCN. Electron microscopy has been used to localize 5-HT1B and 5-HT7 receptors in pre- and postsynaptic membranes within the SCN. Behavioral data, in conjunction with the pharmacological and anatomical findings, highlight the importance of serotonin in regulating the photic information reaching the SCN via the retinohypothalamic tract. It has been hypothesized that serotonin may adjust the gain of the circadian system’s response to light. 
Efferent Projections 
Most SCN efferent projections remain within the limits of the hypothalamus. The best-studied projection originating in the SCN is the multisynaptic projection to the pineal gland. Axons of inhibitory GABAergic SCN neurons traverse the hypothalamus dorsally to the autonomic division of the PVN. The tonic activity of the PVN is suppressed during the day, when the SCN firing rate is high, and is uninhibited during the night, when the SCN is quiescent. The PVN sends a descending glutamatergic projection through the medial forebrain bundle to the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord at the upper thoracic levels (T1 and T2). Cholinergic preganglionic sympathetic neurons propagate this signal by synapsing on adrenergic postganglionic sympathetics within the superior cervical ganglion. These postganglionic fibers finally innervate pinealocytes to stimulate melatonin synthesis. Norepinephrine release from the terminals of these fibers increases intracellular cAMP levels and, consequently, the activity of melatonin synthetic pathway. Melatonin is not stored or released via a secretory pathway. Its lipophilic nature permits it to passively diffuse through membranes. Thus, the release of melatonin is directly related to its rate of synthesis. 
The action of norepinephrine is mediated through β- and α1-adrenergic receptors. β-Adrenergic receptors stimulate the production of cAMP, whereas the α1-adrenergic receptors potentiate the action of β-adrenergic receptors. The ultimate outcome of this efferent pathway is that increased melatonin synthesis occurs when SCN activity is low. This antiphasic relationship is established by the GABAergic sign-changing synapse at the PVN. Melatonin receptors localized to the SCN are likely to provide a feedback mechanism by which the antiphasic relationship between the SCN and the pineal gland is maintained and possibly reinforced. 
A second, less understood efferent pathway from the SCN plays an important role in the control of cortisol. Systemic cortisol levels increase in response to stress. However, these levels also have a strong circadian component, being highest in the early morning in humans. Peak cortisol levels occur at approximately 6 AM to 8 AM, just as melatonin levels approach baseline. This stress-independent component was identified 

========621========

through SCN-lesion studies in rodents that abolished circadian rhythms of cortisol but left the acute response to stress intact. An inhibitory GABAergic projection from the SCN to the hypothalamic PVN is the first element in the neural pathway regulating rhythmic cortisol levels. Axons of this projection synapse on the parvicellular neurons of the PVN that contain CRH. The terminals of these CRH-containing neurons reside in the median eminence, where they release CRH into the pituitary portal system and stimulate the release of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) from the adenohypophysis. ACTH, in turn, acts on the zona fasciculata of the adrenal gland to release cortisol. 
A secondary inhibitory pathway to the PVN via a vasopressinergic projection through the dorsomedial hypothalamus has been implicated in cortisol regulation. Analogous to the circuit controlling pineal melatonin, the circuit regulating cortisol contains a single inhibitory synapse. Accordingly, one would expect a circadian cortisol secretion profile similar in phase and shape to that of pineal melatonin. This is not the case, suggesting the presence of other factors that may be involved in shaping the circadian profile of cortisol. First among these is the mechanism of information transfer. Although the SCN–pineal circuit is exclusively neural, the SCN–adrenal circuit involves the stimulated release of hormones that are subject to the vagaries of diffusion and transport through the circulation. Second, the sensitivity of the adrenal cortex to ACTH also exhibits a circadian variation. Finally, it has been proposed that cortisol itself may provide a feedback on the brain to inhibit CRH and ACTH production. 
Molecular Clockwork 
As mentioned previously, isolated SCN neurons can generate circadian rhythms. For decades, however, the lack of knowledge regarding the inner clockwork of the circadian pacemaker forced investigators to treat the SCN as a “black box.” Since the mid-1980s, progress in understanding rhythmic biochemical processes has led to advances in the identification and characterization of the molecular gears of circadian pacemakers. A cohort of principal clock genes has been identified in mammals since 1997. Many of these molecular components were initially discovered in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, leading to the discovery of mammalian orthologs. The basic architecture of the circadian clockwork is generally conserved among species of the animal kingdom; however, some of the clock genes have been duplicated in the mammalian genome. These duplications have added another level of complexity and the possibility of partially redundant functions. 
The molecular clockwork of the master clock in the SCN is virtually identical to that of the peripheral oscillators. The SCN are so small that their size precludes most biochemical analyses. However, investigators 

========622========

have been able to characterize clock proteins from abundant clock- containing peripheral tissues, such as liver, to understand the workings of the central clock in the SCN. From these and other studies, the following concepts are now established. 
The mammalian circadian clockwork consists of interacting positive and negative transcriptional and translational feedback loops (Fig. 1.14–3). The expression of multiple homologs of the Drosophila period gene and cryptochrome genes are positively regulated by the binding of Clock-Bmal1 (Bmal1 is also known as Mop3) heterodimers to E-box enhancers in the promoters of these genes. The products of the Per and Cry genes translocate back into the nucleus and repress their own transcription. This series of events constitutes the negative feedback limb of the core oscillation. Interestingly, light directly influences the molecular clock via its impact on the expression of Per2, which has either phase advancing or delaying effects on the feedback loop depending on timing within the cycle described above. 
In addition to activating the transcription of the Per and Cry genes, the Clock-Bmal1 complex also activates expression of the orphan nuclear receptor gene Rev-Erba. The gene product of Rev-Erba, in turn, translocates into the nucleus and represses transcription of the Bmal1 gene through Rev-Erb/Ror response elements in the Bmal1 gene promoter. Bmal1 subsequently heterodimerizes with Clock and again activates expression of the Per, Cry, and Rev-Erba genes. This derepression (or activation) of the Bmal1 gene, subsequent heterodimerization with Clock, and activation of the Per, Cry, and Rev-Erba genes constitutes the positive feedback limb of the core oscillator. 
The interactions of clock proteins and the translocations of these proteins between cellular compartments are tightly regulated by posttranslational modifications. For example, phosphorylation of some of the Per proteins by casein kinase Iε or δ is important for their translocation into the nucleus or their degradation in the cytoplasm. Other kinases, and presumably phosphatases, are emerging as critical regulators of the circadian molecular clockwork. More global regulatory mechanisms, such as histone acetylation or phosphorylation, are also likely to control the rhythmic expression and function of clock genes. 

========623========

FIGURE 1.14–3. Transcriptional–translational feedback loops that constitute the molecular clockworks of the mammalian circadian clock. (Adapted from Ko CH, Takahashi JS. Molecular components of the mammalian circadian clock. Human Mol Genet. 2006;15:R271.) 
RESETTING THE CIRCADIAN CLOCK 
Sensory Parameters 
In humans and other mammals, light perceived through the eyes is the most effective agent for entraining (synchronizing) the circadian system to the 24-hour day. Bilateral removal of the eyes renders an individual incapable of resetting the circadian clock, indicating that the photosensitive apparatus necessary for resetting must be ocular. However, several lines of evidence suggest that this apparatus is distinct from the rod and cone photoreceptors that are required for vision. 
First, the photic sensitivities of the visual and circadian systems are quite different. The visual system can be activated by intensities of light ranging from dim starlight to bright daylight. This dynamic range represents approximately 14 log units of light intensity measured in photons per second per square centimeter. The dynamic range of the circadian system is only 3 log units, and the activation threshold is much higher than that of the visual system. Additionally, the circadian system requires light stimuli of much longer duration to activate clock resetting than that required by the visual system to construct images. 
These differences in activation parameters are consistent with the 

========624========

differences in the photoreceptive tasks performed by these functionally distinct systems. The principal task of the visual system is to construct a spatiotemporal representation of the environment. In this sense, the eye functions like a movie camera, acquiring a series of still shots that the brain can interpret as a dynamic visual scene. Thus, information about the relative positions of different stimuli within the visual field must be maintained throughout processing. The ability to detect motion within the visual field also requires a relatively fast integration time analogous to a fast International Standards Organization (ISO) rating for a roll of 35-mm film. These spatial and temporal requirements can be satisfied by a fine two-dimensional array of narrow-capture, highly sensitive, photoreceptive elements, such as the photoreceptor layer of the retina that contains the rod and cone photoreceptors. 
By contrast, the task of the photoreceptive input to the circadian system is the measurement of ambient illumination. In essence, the circadian photoreceptive system must function as a light meter rather than a camera. The requirements of a light meter are different than those of a camera. Spatial information is not important and may, in fact, confound the system. Luminous point sources of light, such as the moon, could prove confusing for narrow-capture photoreceptive elements. If, however, the system used relatively insensitive, broad-capture photoreceptive elements capable of integrating large sectors of visual space, then the relative contribution of the moon’s irradiance to the total ambient irradiance would be minimized and thus would not be mistaken for a daytime light level. Theoretically, a fine, two-dimensional array of narrow-capture photoreceptive elements could serve in this capacity if the output of the array were averaged. Alternatively, an anatomically distinct, coarse array of relatively few broad- capture photoreceptive elements would be optimal for wide spatial integration at a reduced absolute sensitivity. Lightning could also potentially baffle the circadian system. Ambient levels of illumination achieved by lightning can equal those levels of daylight. However, the circadian system’s insensitivity to stimuli of short duration essentially filters out this source of photic noise. Taken together, the spatial and temporal stimulus parameters required to activate the circadian photic input system ensure that only the relevant stimulus, that is, the change in ambient irradiance associated with the day:night cycle, is conferred to the central circadian pacemaker. 
The different sensory demands of the circadian and visual systems raise the possibility that a novel photoreceptive apparatus subserves light- mediated entrainment of the circadian system to the day–night cycle. Visually blind rodents that have a genetically induced loss of rods and cones remain capable of light-mediated circadian clock resetting. Paradoxically, the loss of rods and cones has no effect on the sensitivity of the circadian system to light, despite the fact that these animals are 

========625========

incapable of forming images. A similar situation has been observed in blind humans. A subset of blind individuals retains the ability to photically regulate the rhythmic synthesis of melatonin. 
Some blind individuals report no cognitive visual perception, show no electrophysiological evidence for ocular light detection as determined by electroretinogram analysis, and exhibit no pupillary light response. However, some of these individuals continue to show an acute suppression of nocturnal melatonin and a phase shift in the circadian rhythm of melatonin production. All too frequently, blind individuals are bilaterally enucleated and fitted with prosthetic eyes for reasons ranging from susceptibility to ocular infections to aesthetics. Perhaps some of these decisions should be reconsidered in light of the fact that the eyes of these individuals may retain a function in clock resetting despite being useless for vision. 
NOVEL CLASS OF RETINAL PHOTORECEPTOR 
Intrinsically Photosensitive Retinal Ganglion Cells 
The findings from retinally degenerate animal models and blind humans indicate that photoreceptors other than rods and cones are likely to be involved in the photoregulation of the circadian axis. Blue wavelengths of light most efficiently suppress melatonin in humans; however, the spectral profile of melatonin suppression does not match that of any of the photopigments found in human rods or cones. A small subset of rodent retinal ganglion cells has been shown to be intrinsically photosensitive. The spectral sensitivity of these cells matches the spectral sensitivity of the circadian system. Most compelling, however, is that the intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells project directly to the SCN. They also project to the IGL and the olivary pretectal nuclei, other brain structures involved in the interpretation of illuminance information. The intrinsically photosensitive cells contain melanopsin, a photopigment initially discovered in the pigmented skin cells (melanophores) of tadpoles and subsequently identified in human and mouse retinas. The anatomy and physiology of melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells are consistent with the previously described characteristics expected of cells involved in illuminance detection. Namely, these cells are few in number. They represent 1 to 2 percent of all of the retinal ganglion cells in the rodent retina. These cells are also distributed over the entire retinal expanse. The dendritic arbors of melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells are vast, with arbors in the mouse retina ranging from 400 to 500 μm in diameter. 
Melanopsin itself is localized to the plasma membrane of the cell body, axons, and dendrites. The size of the receptive fields of these cells matches the size of the dendritic arbors, indicating that the entire arbor has the ability to initiate phototransduction and therefore is capable of spatially 

========626========

integrating large sectors of the visual field. The average mouse eye is approximately 3 mm in diameter. Therefore, a photoreceptor with a receptive field diameter of 400 to 500 μm is able to spatially integrate 15 to 20 degrees of visual space. By comparison, the diameter of the full moon at its highest point in the sky is approximately equivalent to 1 degree of the human visual field. Melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells are clearly broad-capture photoreceptors. Furthermore, because the dendritic arbors overlap, these cells form a photoreceptive net in the inner mammalian retina. This complex of cells represents the coarse array of photoreceptive elements expected of an irradiance detector. In addition, the activation parameters of these cells parallel the parameters observed for the circadian system as a whole. The melanopsin-containing ganglion cells are significantly less sensitive to light compared to the rod and cone photoreceptors of the visual system, and they require light stimuli of relatively long duration to be activated. Finally, these cells are maximally sensitive to wavelengths of light similar to those required to acutely suppress nocturnal melatonin levels in humans. 
Function 
Although the anatomy and physiology of melanopsin retinal ganglion cells are highly suggestive that these cells function as circadian photoreceptors, recent studies provide the most compelling evidence. Mice with a targeted disruption of both copies of the melanopsin gene show profound deficits in their ability to phase-shift circadian locomotor rhythms in response to pulses of light. These deficits were observed at all irradiances tested (Fig. 1.14–4). Thus, the photopigment melanopsin and, presumably, the retinal ganglion cells containing melanopsin are required for normal photic regulation of circadian rhythms. Perhaps the most surprising aspect of these “knock-out” studies is that disrupting both copies of the melanopsin gene does not completely abolish light-induced circadian phase shifting; some capacity for phase shifting remains. The photoreceptors mediating this residual sensitivity are likely to be the rods or the cones; however, one cannot exclude the possibility that an unrecognized class of ocular photoreceptor fulfills this role. 
To test the contribution of rod and cone photoreceptors to photoentrainment, melanopsin-null mice have been crossed with mice lacking rods and cones. The progeny of this cross that are rodless, coneless, and melanopsin-null are incapable of photoentrainment, even at high irradiances of ambient light (Fig. 1.14–5). Other nonvisual photophysiology is also abolished in these mice, such as the photoregulation of the melatonin biosynthetic pathway, the pupillary light response, and the acute light-induced inhibition of activity. From these studies, it can be concluded that at least partial functional redundancy exists for nonvisual photoreception between rods, cones, or both, and the melanopsin- 

========627========

containing retinal ganglion cells. It should be the relative contribution of the visual photoreceptors versus that of the melanopsin retinal ganglion cells appears to be different among the various nonvisual responses. For example, melanopsin plays a rather significant role in the phase shifting of circadian locomotor activity; however, the pupillary light response is relatively insensitive to the loss of melanopsin. Importantly, the complete loss of photic responses in melanopsin-null mice lacking rods and cones demonstrates that no additional photopigments, such as cryptochromes, are required for nonvisual photic signaling. Thus, it appears that multiple photoreceptor systems subserve nonvisual photoreception, a phenomenon observed across phylogeny. 

========628========


========629========

FIGURE 1.14–4.Melanopsininthemouse.Top:Retinalganglioncellsinaflat-mounted mouse retina, labeled by indirect immunofluorescence with an antibody against melanopsin. Note the photoreceptive net formed by the overlapping dendritic arbors. (Courtesy of Dr. Ana Castrucci.) Bottom: Fluence–response relationship in wild-type and melanopsin-null mice in response to a 15-minute pulse of blue (480-nm wavelength) light at circadian time 15 hours. Melanopsin-null mice exhibited attenuated phase shifting of circadian locomotor rhythms relative to wild-type siblings at all irradiances tested. (Adapted from Panda S, Sato TK, Castrucci AM, et al. Melanopsin [Opn4] requirement for normal light-induced circadian phase shifting. Science. 2002;298:2213.) 

========630========


========631========

FIGURE 1.14–5. Wheel running activity records of a wild-type mouse and a mouse lacking rods, cones, and melanopsin. Top: Representative double-plotted activity record of a wild-type mouse under entraining conditions of 12 hours of white light (800 lux) and 12 hours of darkness (gray box). Bottom: Representative double-plotted activity records of a mouse lacking rods, cones, and melanopsin under identical entraining conditions. Whereas wild-type mice consolidate their activity to the dark phase and the time of activity onset is coincident with the light to dark transition, the mice lacking rods, cones, and melanopsin continue to free run with an intrinsic period length of less than 24 hours. (Adapted from supplementary data from Panda S, Provencio I, Tu DC, Pires SS, Rollage MD. Melanopsin is required for non-image-forming photic responses in blind mice. Science. 2003;301:525.) 
The dawn of air travel has introduced society to the phenomenon of jet lag, a dramatic example of circadian desynchrony. Simply stated, jet lag is the condition of one’s circadian clock being desynchronized from the local time. Shift work can also cause circadian desynchrony. The invention of artificial lighting has permitted the manufacturing and service industries to work around the clock. As a result, shift workers are constantly experiencing the effects of circadian desynchrony as they try to entrain to an ever-changing light–dark cycle. Some deleterious effects of shift work include elevated stress, deficits in alertness, decreased cognitive function, and gastric distress. Additionally, individuals may experience a phenomenon termed social jet lag, in which those who naturally exhibit slightly delayed sleep–wake patterns are able to sleep on their normal patterns on the weekends but are forced to wake earlier during work days, replicating the desynchronization of one’s circadian clock with the social environment. Similar to shift work and jet lag, social jet lag has been associated with several psychological and biological outcomes including increased risk of depression and obesity. Although no therapy currently exists for jet lag or shift work, an efficacious treatment ultimately must involve the appropriate resetting of the clock. Such a treatment may include timed administration of light stimuli of spectrally optimal wavelengths. A more complete understanding of how melanopsin- containing retinal ganglion cells convert such stimuli into neural signals may present investigators with pharmacological entry points against which chronobiotic drugs can be designed. 
Extra SCN Zeitgebers 
In addition to photic input to the SCN, several other zeitgebers can synchronize rhythms in the periphery. Restricted access to food has been shown to restore circadian rhythms in peripheral tissues in animals with lesioned SCN, suggesting that food has the ability to entrain circadian rhythms in the absence of the master clock. Similarly, administration of methamphetamine in SCN-lesioned mice entrained peripheral clock gene expression and, when administered to intact animals, methamphetamine created phase desynchrony in the periphery relative to the master clock. 

========632========

Together, this indicates that methamphetamine acts as a synchronizing stimulus in the periphery and may compete with other stimuli leading to desynchrony if administered in intact SCN individual. Lastly, time-specific restricted wheel access has been shown to shift heart rate and clock gene expression rhythms in mice, implicating exercise as another zeitgeber. Given the entrainment value of these zeitgebers, especially food and exercise, they may provide novel treatment targets in efforts to stabilize or shift circadian rhythms. 
SLEEP AND CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS 
Sleep Regulation 
Restful consolidated sleep is most appreciated when sleep disturbances are experienced. Sleep is the integrated product of two oscillatory processes. The first process, frequently referred to as the sleep homeostat, arises from the accumulation and dissipation of sleep debt. The biological substrates encoding sleep debt are not known, although adenosine is emerging as a primary candidate neuromodulator of the sleep homeostat. The second oscillatory process is governed by the circadian clock and controls a daily rhythm in sleep propensity or, conversely, arousal. The fact that these two rhythms can be forced to desynchronize establishes that they are two separate processes. 
The circadian cycle in arousal (wakefulness) steadily increases throughout the day, reaching a maximum immediately before the circadian increase in plasma melatonin (Fig. 1.14–6). Arousal subsequently decreases to coincide with the circadian trough in core body temperature. Experiments imposing forced sleep schedules throughout the circadian day have shown that an uninterrupted 8-hour bout of sleep can only be obtained if sleep is initiated approximately 6 hours before the temperature nadir. This nadir typically occurs at approximately 5:00 AM to 6:00 AM. In healthy individuals, initiating sleep between 11:00 PM and 12:00 AM affords the highest probability of getting 8 solid hours of sleep. 

========633========

FIGURE 1.14–6. Relative phase relationship of sleep in young adults to other circadian phase markers. (From Dijk D-J, Lockley SW. Invited review: Integration of human sleep- wake regulation and circadian rhythmicity. J Appl Physiol. 2002;92:852, with permission.) 
It should be stressed that diurnal preference varies among individuals as a function of age, endogenous circadian periods, and other factors. This variability is paralleled by physiology. Clinically, diurnal preference, or chronotype, can be quantified by one of several available morningness– eveningness questionnaires. In qualitative terms, individuals who are labeled as morning types or morning larks tend to awaken earlier and experience the core body temperature minimum at an earlier clock time relative to those who are labeled as evening types or night owls. Sleep deprivation studies have shown that the homeostatic component of sleep is remarkably similar among individuals of similar age. (It should be noted 

========634========

that there is a well-established age-dependent decline in sleep need.) Therefore, chronotype is dictated almost exclusively by the circadian process of sleep regulation. Morning and evening chronotype loosely reflect advanced and delayed circadian rhythms relative to the environmental light cycle. 
The advent of the light bulb has extended the human day into the natural night. This encroachment on the night, although increasing productivity, has affected human sleep patterns (Fig. 1.14–7). Typical use of artificial lights results in a single, consolidated bout of sleep lasting approximately 8 hours. This pattern of sleep is uncommon among most other mammals, which typically experience more fractured sleep. Human sleep under more natural photoperiods, where the duration of the night is longer, becomes decompressed. Specifically, a bimodal distribution of sleep is observed; bouts of sleep occur in early and late night. Periods of quiet wakefulness are interspersed between the two primary bouts of sleep. This bimodal sleep pattern is more similar to the sleep patterns of other mammals. 

========635========

FIGURE 1.14–7. Change of sleep structure in response to artificial lighting. Total sleep time is reduced, and periods of quiet wakefulness are abolished by extending daytime into nighttime through artificial lighting. (From Wehr TA, Moul DE, Barbato G, et al. Conservation of photoperiod-responsive mechanisms in humans. Am J Physiol. 1993;265:R846, with permission.) 

========636========

SEASONALITY 
The 24-hour period of the Earth’s rotation around its axis is unchanging. However, the Earth’s axis is tilted 23.45 degrees from the plane of its own orbit around the sun (the ecliptic). As a result, the relative proportion of daytime to nighttime within the 24-hour astronomical day varies as the Earth proceeds through its orbit of the sun. Many organisms are capable of synchronizing physiology to the seasonal cycle to maximize survival. For example, precise seasonal cycles in reproduction are seen throughout the plant and animal kingdoms. Large mammals that typically have long gestation periods, such as sheep, conceive in the fall when the nights are long and the days are short, so birth occurs during the relatively mild season of spring. These animals are referred to as short-day breeders. Conversely, mammals with gestation periods of only a few weeks, such as hamsters, conceive and give birth during spring and summer, when the days are long and the nights are short. Hence, these animals are referred to as long-day breeders. Like circadian rhythms, many of these yearly (circannual) rhythms tend to persist in the absence of seasonal cues with endogenous periods of approximately 1 year. 
Melatonin and Seasonality 
The most reliable environmental parameter providing a faithful representation of the solar day is the day–night cycle. Similarly, the most reliable environmental parameter reflecting the progression through the seasons is the change in day length, the fraction of the 24-hour day between sunrise and sunset. In seasonally breeding animals, day length is physiologically encoded through the melatonin profile. As described previously, melatonin levels are elevated during the night. A long night, such as that experienced during the short day lengths of winter, results in an elevated melatonin profile of a relatively long duration. A short summer night, by contrast, results in a short duration of elevated melatonin. This seasonal signal is interpreted by the reproductive axis, resulting in an appropriate reproductive response. Melatonin’s role in transducing day length was elucidated by pinealectomizing seasonally breeding animals, thereby removing the primary endogenous source of melatonin. Melatonin was then infused in profiles mimicking long days or short days. The duration of elevated melatonin was the primary determinant of seasonal reproductive status, even when the infused profile was administered under a conflicting day length. Variations in other parameters, such as the amplitude of the melatonin profile, the amount of total melatonin synthesized, or the phase relationship of the profile to the light–dark cycle, are of limited importance in producing a humoral signal that transduces day length. 
Reproductive responses to changing day length can be dramatic. A male 

========637========

Siberian hamster (Phodopus sungorus) maintained in long days is reproductively competent and typically has a testicular weight of approximately 250 mg per testis. Under short days, however, the testes regress to approximately 15 mg per testis, representing a 94 percent decrease in testicular mass. The same degree of regression is observed in response to melatonin infusions that mimic short days. Communication of the hormonally transduced day length to the reproductive axis is likely to be mediated, at least partially, through melatonin receptors in the pars tuberalis near the pituitary stalk. The exact mechanism remains unknown, but activation of these receptors is hypothesized to indirectly regulate an unidentified factor putatively named tuberalin. Tuberalin, in turn, controls gene expression and prolactin release from lactotrophs in the adenohypophysis of the pituitary. 
Seasonality in Humans 
Seasonal variations in human behaviors include seasonal peaks in birth rate, sexual activity, conception, pain thresholds, suicide, and crimes including rape. Seasonal variations are seen in biological processes including growth rate, cortisol, and testosterone levels. The general population experiences a winter worsening of mood, heightened appetite, lengthened sleep duration, lower energy, and less social behavior. While such seasonal variations may have once been adaptive as a mechanism to conserve energy in winter and increase energy in summer to capitalize on seasonally available resources, the industrial revolution has diminished the need for such seasonal variations, and has created an environment in which seasonal variations in mood and behavior are potentially maladaptive. 
The decompressed bimodal structure of human sleep during long nights indicates that the length of natural sleep is related to the length of the night. Potentially, a two-oscillator system could function to maintain proper sleep patterns during changing photoperiods. Such a proposed system would consist of an evening oscillator that tracks the transition from day to night (dusk) and a morning oscillator that tracks the transition from night to day (dawn). The relative phase differences between these oscillators may encode the changing day lengths associated with the passing of the seasons. Biological evidence for a two-oscillator system exists in rodents and humans. 
The melatonin profile of many vertebrates, including some humans, is bimodal, with evening and morning peaks. In rodents, metabolic and electrophysiological studies of the SCN typically have been done in brain slices cut in the coronal plane. Results of electrophysiological studies conducted in brain slices cut in the horizontal plane have provided new insights. The action potential frequency in SCN neurons from horizontally cut preparations is bimodal, with peaks in the early and late subjective day. Furthermore, the interpeak interval varies as a function of the photoperiod 

========638========

in which the animal was housed. These studies lend credence to long- standing suspicions that the SCN of seasonally breeding mammals and, perhaps, nonseasonal mammals harbor a morning and evening oscillator that interact to convey day-length information. 
In seasonally reproductive mammals, the duration of the nightly increase in melatonin effectively encodes day length (or, more accurately, night length). By contrast, in the vast majority of humans, the duration of elevated melatonin is invariant throughout the year. Recent studies have shown that healthy men living in their usual home environment had winter and summer melatonin profiles that were indistinguishable. However, healthy men enrolled in a carefully controlled photoperiod experiment gave surprisingly different results. In this cohort, long nights elicited an extended period of melatonin elevation. Conversely, short nights produced a compressed period of elevated melatonin. In essence, humans retain the capacity to encode day length, although this capacity is masked by the self- imposed artificial lighting regimens of modern society. It should be noted that a small percentage of individuals residing in their usual environment exhibits melatonin profiles that track day length, much like seasonally breeding mammals. Of particular interest are male patients experiencing SAD, some of whom exhibit this apparent seasonality. 
CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS IN PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS 
Seasonal Affective Disorder 
SAD is the most overt manifestation of seasonality in humans. It is characterized by recurrent major depressive episodes followed by periods of remission, or change to mania or hypomania, that recur on a seasonal basis. SAD is diagnosed as MDD, bipolar I or bipolar II disorder, with the specifier “with seasonal pattern” in the Fifth Edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). The seasonal pattern specifier criteria include: 
A. Regular temporal relationship between the onset of major depressive 
episodes and a particular time of the year (unrelated to obvious season- 
related psychosocial stressors). 
B. Full remissions (or a change to mania or hypomania) also occur at a 
characteristic time of the year. 
C. Two major depressive episodes meeting criteria A and B have occurred 
in the last 2 years, and no nonseasonal episodes have occurred in the 
same period. 
D. Seasonal major depressive episodes substantially outnumber the 
nonseasonal episodes over the individual’s lifetime. 
The most prevalent form of SAD has an onset in the late fall and early winter and remits in the late spring and early summer. This condition is frequently referred to as winter SAD, or winter depression, but is a 

========639========

clinically significant level of depression unlike the “winter blues.” Symptoms atypical of Major Depressive Disorder can present with winter SAD. These can include a significant increase in weight, increased appetite, an increase in sleep, a heightened sensitivity to interpersonal rejection, and a leaden feeling in the extremities or psychomotor retardation. Most distinct, however, is a craving for carbohydrates. 
Surveys indicate the prevalence of winter SAD among the general population to be between 4 and 9 percent. Women are up to four times as likely as men to be affected, and as much as 20 percent of the population may have subsyndromal symptoms. Rates of SAD are higher among relatives of those with a confirmed diagnosis of SAD and twin studies identified a heritability of 29 to 43 percent for seasonality and/or SAD. 
The gold standard treatment for winter SAD is light therapy. About half of individuals with SAD experience remission in response to light therapy, representing one of the highest treatment response rates in the field. However, the mechanism behind light therapy is not yet clear. A typical prescription for light therapy involves 45 to 90 minutes daily exposure to a broad spectrum, ultraviolet-filtered, white light source of relatively high irradiance (5,000 to 10,000 lux). Recent studies have suggested that CBT may be equally efficacious compared to light therapy for acute treatment, and may offer prophylactic benefits against recurrences in subsequent years. Multiple antidepressant medications have also been used successfully to treat winter SAD. 
The antidepressant effect of phototherapy in winter SAD patients has given rise to several hypotheses regarding the etiology of the disorder. One hypothesis proposes that SAD patients experience the consequences of a chronically phase delayed circadian clock, suggesting that the aberrant phase angle between the clock and the environment is causative of winter SAD. Although most individuals with SAD report being evening chronotypes, nearly half do not have significantly delayed rhythms. The morning offset of the nightly release of melatonin appears delayed among men with SAD relative to that of healthy controls. However, the onset of melatonin increase is not phase-shifted relative to that of controls. In essence, these patients have a longer duration of elevated melatonin that increases at the same clock time as that of controls but stays elevated longer, thus impinging on the morning hours. Although these data are not consistent with the phase delay hypothesis, they may explain the effectiveness of morning bright light therapy that would acutely suppress the extended melatonin profile of winter SAD patients. It should be noted that the sculpting of the melatonin profile by morning light exposure cannot entirely explain the proven success of phototherapy. In some winter SAD patients, bright light administered during the evening is also antidepressant. In fact, some phototherapy treatment paradigms prescribe morning and evening light exposures, although data suggest that morning 

========640========

light therapy is most effective for the average patient. Individually tailoring light therapy timing based on individual chronotype may confer some advantage, although the data for such tailored prescriptions is limited. 
The success of light therapy administered at various clock times suggests that winter SAD may not have a circadian-based etiology. An alternate hypothesis proposes that patients experiencing winter SAD are generally less sensitive to light than healthy counterparts. Such photic insensitivity would become apparent during the decreased light levels of late fall and early winter, depriving these individuals of the threshold of light required to stave off depression. Accordingly, daily supplementation of light through bright phototherapy would be expected to exceed this theoretical threshold. Multiple studies have identified a retinal subsensitivity in SAD, including a subsensitivity that appears specific to the melanopsin containing retinal cells responsible for conveying light information to the SCN. However, the link between sensitivity of these input cells and treatment response has not been established yet. 
A basic tenet in the development of pharmacological treatments is that a dose dependence must exist to implicate the effectiveness of the drug in question. Similarly, a dose or fluence dependence should be observed with respect to treatment of winter SAD with bright phototherapy. Several studies attempting to document a fluence–response relationship in the treatment of winter SAD have provided the field with conflicting data. Moreover, light therapy, like other photobiological responses, should show a wavelength dependence that reflects the spectral sensitivity of the photopigments mediating that response. Indeed, light therapy focused in the range of blue wavelengths appears to be as effective as brighter white or full spectrum light therapy, although the safety of long-term use of blue- enriched light therapy devices has not been established. 
While there is evidence for retinal subsensitivity in SAD, another possibility is that SAD patients do not experience an inherent insensitivity to light but rather fail to respond appropriately to light. Such responsiveness is hypothetically mediated by central mechanisms downstream of retinal photoreception. Several physiological responses to light have been tested among SAD patients, and no striking deficits in photoresponsiveness were observed relative to healthy controls. Light exposure, however, elicits a myriad of biological responses, some of which are subtle. Studies comparing the photoresponsiveness of SAD and control subjects are far from comprehensive. 
In general, it cannot be denied that phototherapy has proven to be an effective treatment for winter SAD. The mechanisms by which bright light ameliorates the symptoms of this disease remain unknown. 
NONSEASONAL UNIPOLAR DEPRESSION AND CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS 
Abnormal circadian rhythms have been documented in those with 

========641========

unipolar, nonseasonal depression. For instance, individuals with depression are more likely to be evening chronotypes and often show delayed rhythms and reduced peak amplitude of melatonin and core body temperature relative to healthy controls. Daily patterns of worsening mood symptoms in morning or afternoon are evident in nonseasonal depression, and coincide with brain glucose metabolism in affect regulation areas of the brain. Several variants in clock genes have been found to be associated with depression diagnosis, including CLOCK and CRY, although reports are inconsistent. 
In addition, sleep disturbances are characteristic of nonseasonal depression, specifically insomnia. Additionally, REM latency or the time from sleep onset to the first REM episode is shortened, while the duration of REM is lengthened in depression. As improvement in sleep is an important marker of lower recurrence rates, circadian control of sleep is a potential avenue to improve long-term outcomes in depression. A curious phenomenon related to depression and sleep is that total sleep deprivation can provide a transient antidepressant effect in a majority (approximately 60 percent) of depressed patients. This “wake therapy” involves sleep restriction for one night, or for the latter half of one night, but cannot be used as a monotherapy because depressive symptoms will return after a full night of sleep, and the treatment effect must be maintained with another type of treatment. Other chronotherapies, beyond this type of sleep deprivation, include advancing sleep phase, bright light therapy, and melatonin administration. Bright light therapy for nonseasonal depression demonstrates moderate improvement for nonseasonal depression based on a meta-analysis of 20 studies, and is administered to nonseasonally depressed patients similarly as to those with SAD. As is also the case in SAD, evidence for misaligned or shifted circadian phase in nonseasonal depression is inconsistent. This discrepancy suggests that light could have noncircadian antidepressant effects in addition to circadian effects. However, light therapy for nonseasonal, unipolar depression represents an option for adjunctive treatment in addition to antidepressant medication, or another treatment option for cases in which medications are undesirable as in some cases of pregnancy. 
Given that wake therapy can result in fast antidepressant effects, the practice of combining wake therapy with antidepressant medications and/or light therapy shows promise for achieving a rapid response followed by sufficient maintenance of the antidepressant response. In addition, it appears that effective antidepressant medications have therapeutic effects on sleep processes such as inhibiting excessive REM sleep or lengthening REM latency, possibly reflecting underlying circadian resynchronization. Melatonin may be directly linked with monoaminergic activity due to a recent finding that agomelatine (an antidepressant medication that acts as a melatonin receptor agonist) increases monoaminergic activity. 

========642========

Administration of either melatonin or agomelatine 5 hours prior to bedtime can advance rhythms and improve mood. 
When negative life events occur in depression, this may lead to a disruption of social rhythms (e.g., timing of first daily social encounter after the death of a spouse). Limited evidence suggests that such a disruption or irregularity of social rhythms leads to similar disruptions in biological rhythms, and that treatments to restore the regularity of social rhythms may be effective (see IPSRT below). Circadian regulation of hormonal, temperature, and mood rhythms differ, may be differentially influenced by social zeitgebers as well as genetic factors, and are likely to interact, underlining the complexity of circadian influences on mood disorders. 
Bipolar Disorder 
As in nonseasonal depression, circadian abnormalities have been suggested as a potential important etiological mechanism in the development of Bipolar Disorder. Bipolar Disorder has been linked to variants in the core clock genes in humans and in animal models. For example, mice with a mutation in the Clock gene (ClockΔ19) show manic-like behaviors, including hyperactivity and decreased sleep. These ClockΔ19 mice have offered a helpful model to better understand the contribution of circadian disruption in Bipolar Disorder, specifically in recognizing the potential importance of the VTA. ClockΔ19 mice have increased dopamine synthesis in the VTA, suggesting the importance of the Clock gene in dopaminergic activity in the VTA. Further, expression of CLOCK protein in the VTA rescues most of the Clock mutant mice manic-like behavior, including hyperactivity and anxiety. Together, ClockΔ19 mice models suggest the importance of the circadian modulation of dopaminergic activity within the VTA in Bipolar Disorder. 
Human studies in Bipolar Disorder also point to abnormal circadian regulation as a potential etiological mechanism. Circadian abnormalities seem to vary based on which state an individual is experiencing. For example, depression is associated with a phase delay, whereas mania is associated with a phase advance. Therefore, stabilization of these rhythms may help in preventing or reducing the occurrence of manic or depressive episodes in bipolar individuals. Indeed, Interpersonal Social Rhythm Therapy (IPSRT), a type of interpersonal therapy, was developed due to the observation that irregular daily routines resulting in circadian dysregulation precipitate mood episodes. Importantly light therapy has been shown to unmask manic tendencies in those with a predisposition for developing Bipolar Disorder, perhaps due to the relatively abrupt circadian changes, and evidence for the efficacy of light therapy in Bipolar Disorder is currently limited. 
Circadian Sleep Disorders 

========643========

In the DSM-5, Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake disorders include multiple disorders with circadian symptoms and presumed circadian etiology. Among these, advanced sleep phase syndrome (ASPS) is a pathological extreme of the morning lark phenotype. An autosomal-dominant familial form of ASPS (FASPS) recently has been genetically characterized. Afflicted family members exhibit a striking 4-hour advance of the daily sleep–wake rhythm. They typically fall asleep at approximately 7:30 PM and spontaneously awaken at approximately 4:30 AM. Affected individuals have a SNP in the PER2 gene. This adenine-to-guanine nucleotide polymorphism results in serine-to-glycine amino acid substitution that causes the mutant protein to be inefficiently phosphorylated by casein kinase Iε, an established component of the circadian molecular clockwork. Similarly, delayed sleep phase syndrome (DSPS) is likely influenced by genetics. A length polymorphism in a repeat region of the PER3 gene appears to be associated with morning chronotype in DSPS patients, the shorter allele being associated with evening chronotype. 
Although sleep disorders are discussed in Chapter 21, the following Sleep–Wake and Circadian Rhythm Disorders show improvement in response to bright light therapy: DSPS, ASPS, Hypersomnia, Sleep Maintenance Insomnia in the Elderly, Jet Lag and Shift Work Disorders, and Non-24-Hour and Irregular Sleep–Wake Type Circadian Rhythm Disorders. Light therapy is also helpful in normalizing sleep during withdrawal from alcohol, and could therefore be considered as an adjunctive option for many disorders in which sleep and mood are impaired. Chronotherapeutics, treatments administered either according to biological rhythms or in order to normalize biological rhythms, include bright light therapy, melatonin and its agonists, and wake and dark therapy. Such treatments are often the first line of treatment in Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake disorders. 
Memory, Aging, and Neurocognitive Disorders 
Converging circadian disruption paradigms in animals, including both photoperiod shift and clock gene knock-out (KO) models, suggest an important role for circadian organization in proper memory performance. In several studies exposing rats to photoperiod shifts, the shifts lead to poor performance on both acquisition and retention phases of the Morris water maze task relative to rats housed under a naturalistic light dark cycle. Additionally, permanently arrhythmic hamsters are unable to differentiate between novel and familiar objects 20 and 60 minutes after training, representing a significant deviation from normal memory of previously presented objects. Clock gene KO mice also demonstrate abnormal memory performance, indicating the importance of appropriate circadian alignment in normative memory performance. 

========644========

In general, as humans age and normative age-related memory problems begin, individuals experience a shorting of circadian period as well as phase advances resulting in earlier waking times and bedtimes and decreased the amplitudes of most circadian rhythms. Further, aging individuals may be less tolerant of dramatic phase shifts such as those caused by jet lag. Again, a mouse model has provided interesting insight into the interaction of the aging process and the circadian clock. The effect of chronic jet lag on aged mice has dramatic consequences on mortality. About half of aged mice forced to phase advance 6 hours once per week survive this treatment compared with an 83 percent survival rate in unshifted age-matched mice. Aged mice subjected to weekly 6-hour phase delays show an intermediate survival of 68 percent. These profound age effects on mortality in response to phase shifts are not observed in younger mice. The pathogenesis of chronic jet lag remains to be determined. Interestingly, these mice did not suffer an increased rate of tumorigenesis. It is likely that, in humans, as in mice the internal desynchrony of oscillators that results from a shifting light schedule may have dire consequences that are exacerbated by aging. 
Age-related circadian changes, like decreases in amplitude, are exacerbated in age-related neurocognitive disorders including Alzheimer disease (AD). For example, those with moderate dementia exhibited fragmented rhythms and decreased amplitude in activity rhythms relative to mild dementia and healthy control counterparts. The amount of disruption in activity rhythms has also been associated with the severity of neuropathology found in postmortem brains, such that those with the most aberrant activity rhythms around their time of death also exhibited the most neuropathology. Dysregulated circadian rhythms have been found to predate the occurrence of dementia and/or clinical diagnosis of AD and significantly predict the occurrence of AD or mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Together, these pieces of evidence would suggest that circadian disruption may play a central role in the development of the neuropathology and neurocognitive deficits associated with AD. Indeed, light therapy aimed to normalize an individual’s circadian rhythms has been shown to improve AD patient’s sleep and cognitive scores. 
Other Psychiatric Disorders 
Understanding the mechanism of action of light therapy may aid in our understanding of the etiology and treatment of multiple other psychiatric disorders that show improvement in response to light therapy. In addition to SAD and nonseasonal mood disorders, other disorders that improve in response to light therapy include Ante- and Post-Partum Depression, Pre- Menstrual Dysphoric Disorder, Eating Disorders Including Bulimia Nervosa, Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder and disordered sleep due to traumatic brain injury. 

========645========

OTHER CIRCADIAN-CLOCK-ASSOCIATED PATHOLOGIES 
There have been many reports of circadian-clock-associated pathologies. It has been suggested that desynchrony between and among the SCN and the various oscillators in peripheral tissues lies at the heart of these maladies. Examples include cancer, heart disease, and metabolic disorders. Cardiovascular disease risk factors such as obesity, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels, and high triglycerides are more prevalent among shift workers than day workers, as an example. Furthermore, many of these associations with health problems increase in aged shift workers. Epidemiological studies have shown that women working night shifts have a significantly elevated risk of breast cancer. The advent of rodent genetic models with compromised circadian systems has provided new insight into the pathogenesis of such conditions. 
CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS AND PHARMACOTHERAPY 
Circadian rhythmicity can be affected by drugs, and conversely, the circadian clock can modulate the efficacy of drugs throughout the course of the day. A better understanding of these interactions will lead to more effective pharmacotherapies. Some of the best-studied interactions between medications and the circadian clock have included the circadian effects of antidepressants. Elevated nocturnal body temperature is a common feature among depressed patients. This effect may be due to a reduced amplitude of the master circadian oscillator in the hypothalamus that drives body temperature. TCAs and SSRIs reduce elevated nocturnal body temperature while simultaneously enhancing circadian amplitude. Similarly, many depressed patients exhibit a dampened amplitude in daily activity rhythms. Like body temperature, the amplitude in daily activity cycles of depressed individuals may be augmented by TCA or SSRI treatment. 
The use of lithium to treat Bipolar Disorder has been long established. However, lithium also impacts the circadian system, resulting in a lengthening of circadian period. The molecular mechanism by which this occurs remains unknown. Glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) participates within the molecular clock mechanism. Interestingly, GSK3β is inhibited by lithium. In cell culture, GSK3β has been shown to stabilize the negative clockwork regulator REV-ERBα via phosphorylation. REV-ERBα typically represses the transcription of the BMAL1 gene. In the presence of lithium, however, GSK3β is inhibited, thereby preventing the phosphorylation and stabilization of REV-ERBα, which as a consequence is targeted for proteasomal degradation. The degradation of REV-ERBα results in the derepression of BMAL1 transcription. Whether lithium’s influence on circadian behavior is attributable to its inhibitory effect on GSK3β-mediated stabilization of REV-ERBα remains to be determined. 

========646========

Short-acting benzodiazepines (e.g., triazolam [Halcion] and brotizolam [Lendormin]) also exert chronobiological effects. In hamsters, triazolam or brotizolam administered during the middle of the subjective day induces circadian phase advances in activity. Brotizolam has been shown to reduce the light-induced expression of clock genes Per1 and Per2 in the SCN. While benzodiazepines are allosteric modulators of γ-aminobutyric acid A receptors (GABAA), several lines of evidence indicate that the circadian effects of short-acting benzodiazepines require an intact serotonergic system. When the 5-HT1A/7 receptor agonist 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n- propylamino)-tetralin (8-OH-DPAT) is injected into hamsters at subjective midday, phase advances in locomotor behavior and SCN neuronal activity are observed in addition to a reduction in Per1 and Per2 gene expression in the SCN. Recreational drugs of abuse also impact the circadian system. 3,4- Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) or “ecstasy” can act as a serotonin neurotoxin. Hamsters treated with MDMA showed reduced triazolam-induced phase shifts in circadian locomotor activity and a diminished ability to reentrain rhythms posttreatment. MDMA-treated animals exhibited a reduction in serotonergic axonal terminals in the SCN, again emphasizing the importance of an intact serotonergic system in the regulation of the circadian axis. Recreational use of methamphetamine has increased dramatically within the past decade. Chronic administration of methamphetamine disorganizes rodent activity rhythms. However, administration of methamphetamine to rodents rendered arrhythmic through ablation of the SCN results in a reemergence of rhythmicity. The mechanism involved in the rescue of rhythmicity or site of action remains unknown. 
The efficacy and toxicity of many pharmacotherapeutics vary as a function of circadian phase. Daily variations in fixed-dose lethal toxicity have been appreciated in rodents for years. Many anticancer drugs, ranging in mechanism from antimetabolites to DNA intercalators to mitotic inhibitors, have been shown to have 2- to 10-fold changes in tolerability in rodents over the course of the day. Much of this difference is attributed to circadian variations in the body’s ability to absorb, distribute, metabolize, and eliminate toxic compounds. These four processes are affected by underlying circadian rhythms in physiological processes such as daily variations in gastric pH, gastrointestinal mobility, glomerular filtration rate, and membrane viscosity. The rhythmic intake of food during traditionally timed meals also influences how therapeutic drugs are handled by the body. It is becoming clear that to maximize efficacy and minimize toxicity of drugs circadian phase of administration must be considered. Appropriate circadian timing of the administration of multiple drugs can be a daunting challenge to infirmed individuals or their caretakers. The development of small implanted programmable pumps that can be directed to administer anticancer drugs or other therapeutics at 

========647========

particular times of day may provide a limited solution to this challenge. The emergence of the field of chronotherapy is a reflection of the increased understanding of the impact of the circadian system on the effectiveness of pharmacological treatments. 
FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS 
Evidence is emerging that the influence of the circadian system is much broader than previously believed. Desynchrony between the SCN and peripheral oscillators is likely to be involved in the pathogenesis of multiple maladies not limited to psychiatric disorders. Additionally, treatments designed to manipulate the light input, central clock, or clock output mechanisms show promise in treating multiple psychiatric disorders. Bright light therapy is the first line of treatment for MDD with seasonal pattern, and is considered a useful adjunct in nonseasonal depression as well. An important issue not yet resolved is whether the antidepressant effect of bright light therapy is circadian or also has noncircadian antidepressant effects. Resolving this question of mechanism may lead to better improvement rates in response to light therapy. 
REFERENCES 
Berger M, Vollmann J, Hohagen F, Konig A, Lohner H. Sleep deprivation combined with consecutive sleep phase advance as a fast-acting therapy in depression: an open pilot trial in medicated and unmedicated patients. Am J Psychiatry. 1997;154:870. 
Bohle P, Di Milla L, Fletcher A, Rajaratnam S. Introduction: aging and the multifaceted influence on adaptation to working time. Chronobiol Int. 2008;25:155–164. 
Carter DS, Goldman BD. Antigonadal effects of timed melatonin infusion in pinealectomized male Djungarian hamsters (Phodopus sungorus sungorus): duration is the critical parameter. Endocrinology. 1983;113:1261. 
Chen-Goodspeed M, Lee CC. Tumor suppression and circadian function. J Biol Rhythms. 2007;22:291. 
Czeisler CA, Duffy JF, Shanahan TL, Brown EN, Mitchell JF. Stability, precision, and near-24- hour period of the human circadian pacemaker. Science. 1999;284:2177. 
*Davidson AJ, Sellix MT, Daniel J, Yamazaki S, Menaker M. Chronic jet-lag increases mortality in aged mice. Curr Biol. 2006;16:R914. 
Dijk DJ, Lockley SW. Integration of human sleep-wake regulation and circadian rhythmicity. J Appl Physiol. 2002;92:852. 
Germain A, Kupfer DJ. Circadian rhythm disturbances in depression. Human Psychopharmacology. 2008;23:571. 
Harvey AG. Sleep and circadian rythms in bipolar disorder: seeking synchrony, harmony, and regulation. Am J Psychiatry. 2008;165:820–29. 
Herzog ED, Schwartz WJ. A neural clockwork for encoding circadian time. J Appl Physiol. 2002;92:401. 
*Klein DC, Moore RY, Reppert SM, eds. Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: The Mind’s Clock. New York: 

========648========

Oxford University Press; 1991. 
Klerman EB, Shanahan TL, Brotman DJ, Rimmer DW, Emens JS. Photic resetting of the human circadian pacemaker in the absence of conscious vision. J Biol Rhythms. 2002;17:548. *Ko CH, Takahashi JS. Molecular components of the mammalian circadian clock. Hum Mol Genet. 2006;15:R271. 
Kondratova AA, Kondratov RV. The circadian clock and pathology of the ageing brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012;13(5):325–35. 
*Levi F, Schibler U. Circadian rhythms: mechanisms and therapeutic implications. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2007;47:593. 
McClung CA. How might circadian rhythms control mood? Let me count the ways… Biol Psy. 2013;74(4):242–49. 
Miller JD, Morin LP, Schwartz WJ, Moore RY: New insights into the mammalian circadian clock. Sleep. 1996;19:641. 
Moore RY. Circadian rhythms: basic neurobiology and clinical applications. Annu Rev Med. 1997;48:253. 
Morin LP. The circadian visual system. Brain Res Rev. 1994;19:102. 
Nelson DE, Takahashi JS. Sensitivity and integration in a visual pathway for circadian entrainment in the hamster (Mesocricetus auratus). J Physiol. 1991;439:115. 
Quintero JE, Kuhlman SJ, McMahon DG. The biological clock nucleus: a multiphasic oscillator network regulated by light. J Neurosci. 2003;23:8070. 
Ralph MR, Foster RG, Davis FC, Menaker M. Transplanted suprachiasmatic nucleus determines circadian period. Science. 1990;247:975. 
Roecklein KA, Wong PM, Miller MA, Donofry SD, Kamarck ML, Brainard GC. Melanopsin, photosensitive ganglion cells, and seasonal affective disorder. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2013;37:229. 
*Roybal K, Theobold D, Graham A, et al. Mania-like behavior induced by disruption of CLOCK. P Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007;104(15):6406–11. 
Ruby NF, Brennan TJ, Xie X, Cao V, Franken P. Role of melanopsin in circadian responses to light. Science. 2002;298:2211. 
Smith BN, Sollars PJ, Dudek FE, Pickard GE. Serotonergic modulation of retinal input to the mouse suprachiasmatic nucleus mediated by 5-HT1B and 5-HT7 receptors. J Biol Rhythms. 2001;16:25. 
*Takahashi JS, Turek FW, Moore RY, Takahashi JS, Turek FW, eds. Handbook of Behavioral Neurobiology: Circadian Clocks. New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2001. 
Toh KL, Jones CR, He Y, Eide EJ, Hinz WA. An hPer2 phosphorylation site mutation in familial advanced sleep phase syndrome. Science. 2001;291:1040. 
Weekes NY, Lewis RS, Goto G, Garrison-Jakel J. The effect of an environmental stressor on gender differences on the awakening cortisol response. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2008;33:766–772. 
Yamazaki S, Goto M, Menaker M. No evidence for extraocular photoreceptors in the circadian system of the Syrian hamster. J Biol Rhythms. 1999;14:197. 

========649========

▲ 1.15 Applied Electrophysiology 
JASON K. JOHANNESEN, PH.D., AND PATRICK D. SKOSNIK, PH.D. 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the past few decades, electrophysiology has contributed substantially to the understanding of normal brain functions as well as brain function deviations in psychopathological conditions. Monitoring brain processes in real time requires millisecond-level resolution to follow the typical timing and rapid unfolding of neural events. Electroencephalographic (EEG) techniques enable the study of brain activity with a high temporal resolution, making it possible to measure differences in the time course of brain electrical activation during both elementary sensory processes (e.g., sensory registration and discrimination) as well as complex cognitive processes (e.g., mental calculations and working memory). Despite the continued development of high-density digital EEG recoding and associated methods of interpolating sources of underlying neural activations, the strength of EEG remains to be nested in ascertainment of events as they occur in time rather than from which brain structures they evolve. This distinction is commonly discussed in terms of the tradeoff between “temporal” and “spatial” resolution, which applies to all methods of brain imaging and, thereby, should guide the selection of methods most appropriate to investigate questions concerning neural processes versus brain structures associated with a particular clinical phenomenon. 
A renascence of EEG methods has been promoted by the accessibility of these instruments to cognitive and clinical scientists who seek cost-efficient and noninvasive means of applying measures of brain function to new experimental, diagnostic, and computational questions. EEG methodology is exquisitely applied in perusal of current theories on the pathogenesis of psychiatric illness, no longer conceptualized as the result of a dysfunction of one or more brain regions, but as a consequence of the failure to integrate neural activity through networks engaged across multiple brain regions. Advances in electrophysiological measurement of brain function has been aided by technological advances at levels of bioamplification, electrode sensors, and computational algorithms for signal processing and quantification. As will be discussed further in this chapter, EEG remains early in its development as an applied area of psychiatry, yet to be widely accepted as a diagnostic tool beyond detection of organic conditions that may mimic psychiatry symptomatology. Nevertheless, EEG methodology and its interface with experimental neuroscience continue to hold an important position at the forefront of psychiatry research, contributing both to areas of illness characterization and treatment development. In 

========650========

time, and with necessary large-scale replication, the ultimate goal will be to translate research findings to clinical protocols that can be used to inform early prediction of illness, differential diagnosis, and treatment response of common psychiatric disorders. 
Applied electrophysiology remains a growing discipline within the field of medicine broadly, encompassing a range of both diagnostic neuroevaluative techniques and therapeutic brain stimulation procedures. EEG is one example, used as a diagnostic tool for seizure and epilepsy, sleep disorders, head trauma, tumors, infections, encephalopathies, anoxia, and cases where acute toxicity may be suspected. There are a number of examples from clinical research, such as the case of traumatic brain injury secondary to blast pressure waves, where EEG has demonstrated superior sensitivity to a pathophysiological process than structural brain scans. In the practice of clinical psychiatry, EEG is used primarily as screening tool for ruling out organic etiology, with differential diagnosis among psychiatric disorders informed by history and clinical interview. Although this chapter will focus primarily on EEG, additional diagnostic techniques worth mention include evoked potentials (EP), entailing the visual evoked response (VER), auditory brainstem evoked potentials (ABEPs), and somatosensory evoked response (SER), reflecting the earliest stages of CNS registration of sensory stimulation. EP diagnostic procedures are commonplace to neurologic evaluation, however, paradigms derived from this work, such as the steady-state evoked potential (SSEP), have also been adopted in psychiatric research. While not discussed in this chapter, a range of therapeutic brain stimulation procedures, including transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), vagal nerve stimulation (VNS), and Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) may hold new promise as treatment options in psychiatry. TMS, in particular, has received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for patients suffering from depression who have not achieved satisfactory improvement from conventional therapies. Given these trends, it is conceivable that in the not too distant future psychiatrists could be offered specialized training programs to perform these diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. A generation of clinical psychiatric electrophysiologists (CPEs) thus could begin to provide a much needed service within the psychiatric community, as well as lead and galvanize clinically driven psychiatric electrophysiology research. Growth of this field nonetheless is expected to come mainly from various techniques used to extract information from EEG records, such as quantitative EEG (Q-EEG), event-related potentials (ERP), time–frequency analysis, coherence measurement, and source analysis, which will be discussed in subsequent sections. 
HISTORY 
Experimental evidence of brain-derived electrical potentials was first 

========651========

established in 1874 with Richard Caton’s (1842 to 1926) discovery of spontaneous electrical activity recorded from the exposed cortices of cats, rabbits, and monkeys. However, the lengthy transition from laboratory experiment to eventual acceptance of EEG was plagued by intense controversy. Despite the continuing accumulation of evidence, the notion of electrical potentials emanating from the brain was rejected for nearly 50 years by leading authorities. Caton’s work was replicated by Vasili Danilevsky’s 1877 report that electrical oscillations recorded from the animal brain could be altered by strong sensory stimuli. Three further historical highlights of note include (1) the 1891 demonstration by Adolph Beck that the dog visual cortex produced large electrical potentials when the eyes were rhythmically illuminated (thus laying the experimental foundation for EEG photic driving), (2) Beck and Napoleon Cybulski’s 1892 report that local injury to the cortex could alter the characteristics of recorded spontaneous electrical activity, and (3) Cybulski’s 1914 report that brain wave seizure discharges could be induced in the cortex by applying electrical stimulation to the cortex (thus presaging the use of EEG in epilepsy). Despite this stream of successful experimental work, the EEG phenomenon continued to be scrutinized by the scientific community. 
Caton’s seminal work was finally brought to light when cited in 1929 by Hans Berger (1873 to 1941), reporting the discovery of the alpha waves at the emergence of the field of electroencephalography. The focused perseverance of Hans Berger, a biologically oriented Professor of Psychiatry and Director of the Psychiatric Clinic in Jena, Germany, finally brought EEG to a position of acceptance and clinical utility. After years of unsuccessful attempts to record brain waves from humans (he was able to obtain recordings from animals), he finally succeeded in recording the human EEG in 1924, and in 1929 published the first in his classic series of 23 papers describing many aspects of the human EEG. Among his vast achievements, Berger demonstrated that brain electrical activity came from neurons and not blood vessels or connective tissue, that recordings from patients with brain tumors contained high-voltage slow waves (his recording technique did not permit localization), that waking alpha waves were blocked by eye opening, and that the characteristics of EEG activity change with age, sensory stimulation, state of consciousness, and physiochemical state of the body. However, acceptance was still temporarily delayed when Lord Adrian, a Nobel laureate neurophysiologist, claimed that Berger’s findings were “impossible.” Later, in 1934, Lord Adrian publicly confirmed Berger’s work, and the field of electroencephalography was born. 
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY 
The term electroencephalogram, coined by Hans Berger, refers to the graphic record of brain electrical activity, or brain waves. The related term, 

========652========

electroencephalograph, refers to specialized instrumentation used to record electrical potentials at the scalp surface. The abbreviated term, EEG, may be used interchangeably to refer to either the record or the recording instrument. As rendered by EEG, the brain wave reflects the transient difference in electrical potential (greatly amplified) between any two points on the scalp or between an electrode placed on the scalp and one located at a neutral off-scalp location (e.g., ear lobe, mastoid, nose), used as a reference. In a simplistic sense, the EEG is an extremely sensitive voltmeter, with the unit of measurement being the microvolt (μV), or millionth of a volt. Typical EEG signals range from approximately 30 to 80 μV, but can be as low as 10 μV or as high as 150 or 200 μV in some high- voltage “spike” discharges. The difference in electrical potential measured between any two EEG electrodes fluctuates or oscillates rapidly, usually many times per second. It is this oscillation that produces the characteristic “squiggly line” that even many lay persons now recognize as the appearance of “brain waves.” 
The earliest EEG recordings involved only one pair of electrodes, or one channel of recording, and although this could detect certain normal and abnormal features, effective clinical application remained for the future. Soon, the ability to record two channels of EEG was accomplished, making it possible to record activity simultaneously from homologous locations in each hemisphere. Before long, the rapid advances in recording technology allowed four- and eight-channel recordings to be made, and EEG became a viable clinical tool. Eventually, 10-, 12-, and 16-channel recording machines became the standard workhorses of clinical and research EEG laboratories around the world. EEG equipment capable of simultaneous recording from 32 to 64 channels is now commonplace in most electrophysiology laboratories, with 128 and 256 channel systems also used in research where “high-density” recording may lend further accuracy to estimation of current sources. The ability to simultaneously record brain waves from many scalp locations is important, because it allows direct comparisons between homologous cortical regions, permits recording arrays to locate focal or regional abnormal features more clearly, and increases the ability to detect various artifacts, sources of signal of noncerebral origin that contaminate the EEG. 
Brain wave activity captured on the scalp by EEG is a result of the summed extracellular electric potential fields generated by large numbers of neurons. Thus, EEG cannot detect the electrical activity generated by a single neuron or even by several neurons close to the scalp. Rather, the scalp-recorded EEG signals are the result of summated field potentials generated by excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (i.e., EPSPs and IPSPs) in vertically oriented pyramidal cells of the cortex. An EPSP in a dendrite produces electrical negativity in the immediately surrounding area, but the electrical field becomes positive with increasing distance from 

========653========

the source. The reverse occurs with an IPSP, generating an electrical positivity nearby and a negative field at a distance. The summation of EPSPs and IPSPs is enhanced, because the neurons are tightly packed together and oriented vertically in parallel. In order to be detectable by surface EEG electrodes, neural activity has to be strong enough to cross other tissue and fluid (i.e., CSF, dura, skull, scalp). It is the transduction of current across tissue and fluid of different densities, with different electrical resistance, that contributes to the wide diffusion of current as it is recorded over the scalp. This is one important aspect of EEG recording that must be considered when making assumptions of underlying source and the direction of current projection. The transduction of electrical activity from cortex to scalp relies on the ability of the brain to synchronize large populations of cells, which can occur either spontaneously or in response to a stimulating event. Neuronal activity that is unsynchronized cancels out due to destructive interference, thus does not contribute to the electric field potentials recorded as scalp EEG. Because of the manner in which the dominant intrinsic brain waves are generated, EEG is maximally sensitive to cortical neuronal activity and relatively insensitive to electrical potentials generated from subcortical regions. However, there are exceptions, as subcortical neuronal events can influence cortical neuronal firing via afferent transmissions along subcortical–cortical tracts. 
Probably the first observation about brain waves, going back to the time of Caton, was that many recorded potentials oscillate and repeat in a rhythmic fashion. Indeed, the term intrinsic rhythms is often used for normal activity, and the term dysrhythmic is used for activity that might be abnormal. Within reasonable limits, the repetitive rhythmic nature of the EEG is stable across individuals and within individuals over time, barring the introduction of pathophysiological events. Indeed, the quantified EEG signal has been shown to have high test–retest reliability in a number of recording situations, with coefficients of r = 0.90 reported in healthy adults and in individuals with schizophrenia, while work by Thomas Lund and collaborators actually found higher test–retest reliability in schizophrenia (r = 0.94) than in healthy comparison subjects (r = 0.70). Examination of test–retest reliability in task-related EEG, recorded under conditions of mental challenge, tends to produce higher reliability coefficients than obtained from conventional resting EEG. The stability of EEG spectral characteristics may also have a genetic basis, with an average biometric heritability estimate of 0.78 reported for a large-scale (N = 4026) community sample of adolescent twins and their parents. Although the EEG does reflect state-dependent changes, sensitive to states of wakefulness and relaxation for instance, its reliability within individuals over time has been interpreted by some authors as evidence of an EEG set point, a natural spontaneous rhythm that is individually characteristic and stable over time. The concept of a set point suggests that repeated testing 

========654========

with averaging across test sessions would help to eliminate measurement error, thus maximizing the chances of detecting illness-related changes. Given further evidence that EEG characteristics are to some extent heritable, EEG measures may be particularly useful for the early detection of pathophysiological features in individuals regarded to be at elevated risk for developing a psychiatric disorder due to family history. 
Despite the more than 130 years that have passed since the original recording of EEG by Richard Caton, over which a variety of abnormal findings have been reported in many psychiatric conditions, electrophysiological methods have yet to find a prominent role in the training and clinical practice of psychiatry. This is in contrast to EEG’s well-established position in clinical neurology as an approved subspecialty, sanctioned by the American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) and the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology (ABPN). De-emphasis of EEG training in psychiatry is most likely secondary to many factors. Prominent among these factors are the complex and heterogeneous nature of psychiatric disorders in general, for which there are currently no formally accepted diagnostic techniques beyond the clinical interview. The lack of familiarity of psychiatrists with electrophysiological techniques, and heightened standards for evidence-based practices, are additional factors to contend with when considering the feasibility of dissemination of electrophysiological techniques in clinical psychiatry practice. 
Basics of EEG Interpretation 
The interpretation of the EEG record is essentially a problem of learning to recognize all of the myriad intrinsic waveforms, their expected distributions over cortical regions, and their range of variation in amplitude and degree of symmetry. Although there is little doubt that 64, 32, or even 16 channels of oscillating waves appear quite confusing to the beginner, there is an inherent regularity to the brain’s electrical output that an experienced electroencephalographer comes to recognize. Because of this inherent regularity, the intrinsic EEG rhythms and their range of variation that characterizes the wake, drowsy, and various sleep states become easily identified through practice and experience. Various electrophysiological phenomenon of nonencephalic origin, which need to be distinguished from EEG signal, also produce localized or regional waveforms of stereotypical appearance that one can learn to identify. The primary job of the interpreter is to identify those EEG waveforms that appear to fall outside of what one might call the normal range of variation of the intrinsic background activity, and therefore are (1) frankly abnormal with known pathophysiological correlates or (2) controversial abnormal waveforms of potential clinical relevance, pending the results of further continuing clinical investigation. 

========655========

Interpreter Reliability 
Because the EEG record is obtained by precisely measuring the microvolt fluctuations of electrical potentials over the scalp, a misconception often emerges that EEG interpretation is purely objective in the sense that measurements of temperature, weight, length, and volume are objective. In truth, there is a large, subjective element of judgment in EEG interpretation, and the achievement of skill in this area only follows a period of thorough training and the guiding hand of clinical experience. Accepted EEG abnormalities do not always appear in the EEG tracing in clear-cut textbook form, and there are always ambiguities in areas where EEG activity that is clearly normal becomes blurred and shades off into waveforms that are unequivocally abnormal. 
Although the important area of reliability of clinical EEG interpretation has not received extensive study, it has generally been assumed that high levels of interpretation reliability can be obtained through training and clinical experience. Two formal methods of assessing reliability involve comparing the independent readings of two or more EEG interpreters (interrater reliability) and asking one electroencephalographer to blindly reinterpret a sample of EEGs after an elapsed time (intrarater reliability). When these methods were employed in a recent study of six board-certified clinical neurophysiologists, asked to classify 300 EEGs into one or more of seven diagnostic categories, the findings suggested that clinical interpretation of EEG should receive much greater attention as a matter of training and practice. It was reported that five of the six readers provided confidence ratings of their interpretation with a median score of ≥99 percent. However, intrarater reliability coefficients ranged from 0.33 to 0.73 with an aggregate value of 0.59, while interrater coefficients ranged from 0.29 to 0.62, with an aggregate value of 0.44. The take-home point of this study is that while experienced epileptologists have very high confidence in their EEG interpretations, this confidence may not be founded in actual performance, and that further training to improve EEG accuracy and reliability is needed. One suggestion for accomplishing this goal is through continuing medical education modules that measure and report EEG reliability scores to individual users. 
From earlier meta-analytic work on this topic, it should be noted that interpretive differences usually involve disagreements over ambiguous areas in which alterations in the frequency, symmetry, or amplitude of the intrinsic EEG approach what, by consensus, would be considered outside of normal limits. In such transition areas the dividing line is not sharply precise, and statements such as borderline slowing are sometimes used to denote the understandable uncertainty that is involved. When disagreements in this borderline region are removed from consideration, interpretive agreements tend to improve well into high ranges of reliability. 

========656========

As a final point on reliability, the reader is referred to a detailed review and analysis by Robert Thatcher, published in 2010 in the Journal of Neurotherapy. Dr. Thatcher contrasts reliability results obtained through modern, digitally analyzed, Q-EEG techniques with clinical interpretation by traditional “eye ball” examination, which has remained the standard for clinical EEG examination since its inception. This review highlights advances in EEG analysis that have been primarily driven through scientific research, and clearly exemplify the advantages that could be achieved with greater acceptance of these methods in clinical practice. 
EEG RECORDING AND RELATED METHODOLOGY 
Much has been written about the complexities of EEG recording, interpretation, and the corresponding level of skill needed to obtain an adequate EEG. What may be insufficiently recognized is the fact that there are also clinical situations in which a greatly simplified EEG obtained by a properly trained registered nurse or resident can have substantial diagnostic usefulness. There are some important EEG findings of particular relevance to emergency room settings and, possibly, even to some acute psychiatric admission or triage units that can be obtained in only 10 minutes by clinicians with a minimum level of technical skill. Clinical cases presenting moderate to marked confusion and agitation, delirium, or possible nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) may have diffuse EEG abnormalities that are more or less continuous in the tracing, detectable almost as soon as the recording is turned on. Such findings do not require sophisticated localization studies, and their presence, as well as their absence, is diagnostically relevant. Prompt access to an EEG laboratory may not always be possible, especially on weekends or evenings, thus on- site screening may be most helpful. 
Other than the circumscribed screening EEGs described above, recording the EEG does, in fact, require a considerable amount of skill and experience. It is not merely a technical act performed by a technician. The unfolding clinical EEG record is a constantly moving and shifting display of complex waveforms recorded simultaneously from numerous scalp locations, and the EEG patterns differ dramatically during wakefulness, drowsiness, and various sleep levels. The appearance of the EEG also changes from one recording montage to another, along with differences in the reference selected, while a host of normal and abnormal EEG waveforms and contaminating artifacts must be identified in their obvious and subtle forms. Identifying the source of artifacts and minimizing their intrusion on the EEG is most critical during the recording procedure, as application of offline removal and correction procedures require an advanced skill set and appreciation of intricacies of how such transforms may inadvertently change the appearance of features retained in the EEG. In addition to having the skills to correctly apply electrodes and operate 

========657========

amplifier and recording equipment, the better technologists are also capable of sophisticated EEG interpretation. It may not be obvious how important this is. EEG abnormalities do not always emerge in clear-cut, textbook form but instead may be distorted and, hence, ambiguous. Interpretative ability is necessary to recognize probable abnormalities and then to arrange recording montages and states of patient alertness (wake or sleep) in ways that can enhance the patterns and allow a more definite interpretation by the electroencephalographer. A minimum of 1 year of full- time training, including didactic instruction and supervised, hands-on recording and interpretation experience, is necessary for an EEG technologist to achieve competence. Formal training schools for EEG technologists exist in many places, and the graduates can become registered EEG technologists by taking and passing a two-part written and practical examination. 
Working in a psychiatry environment has its own challenges that technicians must be comfortable handling. First and foremost is being able to deal with a disturbed individual. It should be appreciated that clinical EEG is typically administered under conditions proximal to an acute change in mental state; therefore, psychiatric symptoms may be exacerbated. An EEG technologist who practices in a psychiatric setting must know when to terminate a procedure, call for help, and try to de- escalate a situation. Even the most cooperative psychiatric patients can also present challenges for EEG recording due to increased eye and involuntary body movements associated with tardive dystonia and akathisia. Muscle activity, particularly of the eyes, mouth, and jaw, produces changes in electrical activity on a much larger scale than brain activity and can contaminate an EEG record to the point where no reliable interpretation can be made. Given that good awake recording is necessary, sedation is not an acceptable procedure. On the other hand, the need for sleep in order to more completely assess paroxysmal activity, such as spike-wave discharges associated with seizure and other forms of neuropathology, mandates that all efforts be taken to get the patient to fall asleep. This may require decreasing the lighting and allowing the patient to relax. Room temperature in EEG recording environments is ideally kept between 70° and 75°F (21° to 24°C), a comfortable temperature at which an individual would not be expected to perspire. It is important to minimize changes in body temperature that could contribute to perspiration at the scalp, as sweat interacts with electrolytic gel applied to maintain conductance and reduce electrode impedance, produces slow drift and other artifact affecting EEG signal, and can contribute to “salt bridging” of adjacent electrodes (essentially connecting electrodes together so no differentiation can be made between signal recorded at the bridged sites). Perspiration and associated changes in skin conductance are also associated with increased sympathetic arousal, which should be recognized in agitated or highly 

========658========

anxious patients. For these reasons, patients should be encouraged to remove heavy clothing or excessive layers if tested in street attire and, as stated previously, every effort should be made to keep the patient comfortable and relaxed. Explaining the purpose of the procedure, the EEG apparatus, and the signals obtained by EEG recording (e.g., an analogy to an EKG of cardiac activity but with electrodes place on the head to record brain activity) during electrode application can go a long way in helping the patient feel informed and at ease with the process. Careful procedures will prolong the recording time in psychiatric patients. However, in laboratories where psychiatric patients are not routinely evaluated, technicians may be inclined to hurry the procedure up instead of slowing it down. 
EEG Apparatus 
The basic components of the EEG recording apparatus are the (1) electrodes, (2) amplifier, and (3) recording device including means of visualizing, acquiring, and storing the EEG record. Each will be discussed in following sections. 
Electrodes. As EEG emerged into the clinical arena, electrodes simply were placed on the scalp symmetrically by eye, using salient landmarks on the head as reference points, and not all laboratories used the same placement system. Eventually, in 1947, it was decided at an International EEG Congress held in London that some effort should be made to standardize the system of electrode placement, so that clinical and research findings would be more directly comparable across different laboratories. The challenge was taken up by Herbert Jasper, who developed the 10–20 International System of electrode placement, which has become standard worldwide since 1958. The system is based on two anatomical landmarks for positioning; the nasion, identified as the depressed area between the eyes above the bridge of the nose and the inion, which is the highest point of the external occipital protuberance, located by a prominent bump at back of head near the lowest point of the skull. Briefly, measurement is taken from the total nasion-to-inion distance, and the midpoint is marked at a distance 50 percent between these points (and 50 percent of the transverse distance between the preauricular points on the ears). The 10– 20 nomenclature refers to the distance between electrodes, positioned at either 10 percent or 20 percent of the actual anterior–posterior or transverse distance of the skull (Fig. 1.15–1A,B). Each electrode location is associated with an underlying area of cerebral cortex, indicated by the letters F, T, C, P and O, reflecting frontal, temporal, central, parietal, and occipital lobes, respectively, followed by either the lowercase letter “z” for midline electrodes or a number indicating homologous left- (odd numbers) or right- (even numbers) sided locations. Thus, electrodes O1 and O2, for example, are placed over the left and right sides of the occipital region, 

========659========

respectively. Electrode Cz, also referred to as the vertex, is the most centrally located electrode and is used as the midpoint for alignment to the intersection of nasion-to-inion and transverse distance measures. The standard 10–20 system is based on a total of 21 electrodes, with 19 scalp sites including two electrodes at frontal polar sites (Fp1, Fp2), and two electrodes affixed at earlobes (A1, A2) which have traditionally served as a common reference for scalp electrodes. 
FIGURE 1.15–1. A: International 10–20 Electrode Placement System, as viewed from the top of the head. B: A left-lateral diagram of the head showing the locations of the routine 10–20 electrodes. Note the relationships between electrodes placed on the scalp and underlying brain structures. 
Although precise localization with respect to underlying functional anatomy should not be assumed, some basic generalizations have been made concerning electrode location and the nature of brain activity detected in their region. For instance, the frontal–central electrode Fz is located in proximity to frontal lobe structures important to intention and motivational processes, while central sites near the vertex (C3, Cz, C4) are sensitive to sensory (particularly auditory registration) and motor processes, and occipital locations O1 and O2 to early stage visual processes. In addition, temporal sites (T3, T4, T5, T6) have shown sensitivity to memory and emotional processes, with temporoparietal electrode sites (P7, P8) typically selected for experimental studies on neural activity involved in structural facial encoding. Again, report of these findings is not intended to insinuate that EEG is an effective tool for localization of function to a known source, but rather to provide examples that illustrate the importance of multichannel recording and standardized electrode placement for characterizing unique and spatially distributed brain signals. 
Although most laboratories use 21 scalp electrodes for standard 

========660========

recordings, the 10–20 system enables expansion of electrodes to provide greater coverage, with additional electrodes typically placed at 10 percent of the distance between the original 10–20 locations. The American EEG Society (currently the American Clinical Neurophysiology Society [ACNS]) has developed a nomenclature for the designation of as many as 75 defined electrode locations. However, it must be stressed that extremely large numbers of scalp electrodes are unnecessary for currently established clinical EEG applications. For currently accepted clinical indications, optimally useful EEG recordings can be achieved with as few as 16 (minimum recommended standard) or, at the most, 32 scalp electrodes. While preparation and setup time must always be considered as a constraint on the number of electrodes that can feasibly be applied in a given recording situation, arrays of 128 or even 256 scalp leads are not uncommon in specialized research applications where aims of data collection include current source analyses and three-dimensional modeling (benefitting from additional electrode placements below scalp). An example of an extended 64 channel electrode array can be seen in Figure 1.15–2. 
The 10–20 placement system has several advantages. Because the placement system is based on rigorous measurements, electrode placement error, particularly asymmetrical placement of electrodes for homologous electrode pairs, is greatly minimized. The system also renders recordings entirely comparable between laboratories, as well as across serial recordings obtained from a single subject. Because percentages of distances between landmarks on the head are used for placement locations, scalp electrodes overlie the same cortical regions despite differences in head size. Furthermore, the relationships between electrodes placed on the scalp and underlying brain structures have been well established (Fig. 1.15–1B) by using placements on cadavers (with holes drilled at the electrode sites to later identify the cortical area under the electrode), as well as studies using CT scanning. 

========661========

FIGURE 1.15–2. An expanded 64-electrode array. Such extensive placement systems are primarily used for special research studies and are rarely used for clinical recordings. 
It has been suggested that in cases of suspected temporal lobe abnormality that is unconfirmed by conventional EEG recording, closer examination of the temporal area should be attempted. This is due to the fact that the anterior temporal lobe is not well covered by the standard 10– 20 placement system. The F7 and F8 electrodes are over the posterior– inferior–frontal lobe and, hence, forward of the temporal pole, whereas the T3 and T4 electrodes are behind the anterior temporal region. Some laboratories now add new electrodes (T1 and T2) or simply relocate the F7 and F8 electrodes to this new position. The placement of the T1 and T2 anterior temporal electrodes is based on the distance from the lateral canthus of the eye to the external auditory canal, with electrodes placed at one-third of this total distance anterior to the auditory canal and 1 cm up from a line connecting these two landmarks. However, the F7 and F8 electrodes may detect potentials spreading from the anterior temporal 

========662========

cortex, particularly if the voltages of the discharges are high. 
Scalp electrodes must be applied carefully. The skin under the electrode must be clean and completely free of oil or grease. A common practice is to rub the area with a slightly abrasive cleansing electrolyte material that also removes some of the superficial epidermis. When this is done, a metal disc electrode can be applied to the scalp by using a conducting electrode gel. Electrode impedance should be maintained at equal to or less than 5,000 ohms (5 K Ohms) and closely matched across electrodes, ideally within 1 K Ohm of each other. The electrode application procedure should not be uncomfortable for the subject, however, scalp abrasion has typically been used to perforate the most superficial layer of skin as a method to reduce scalp impedance. Modern EEG systems designed for research enable high- impedance recording through the use of active electrodes (of note, active systems have not yet been approved for clinical use). Active electrode systems do not require skin abrasion, rather, acceptable signal-to-noise quality is achieved through preamplification at the electrode stage. Placing the first stage of amplification nearer to the scalp reduces the propagation of electrical interference through the shielded electrode cable to the amplifier, at which point line noise is amplified at the same scale as EEG signal. Active electrodes do not overcome the necessity to assure good conductance at the scalp site through careful setup and application of electrolyte gel, but may reduce overall preparation time by foregoing the need for scalp abrasion common to passive electrode systems. 
SPECIAL ELECTRODES. Nasopharyngeal (NP) electrodes are inserted into the nostrils to achieve EEG recording with closer proximity to basal temporal lobe that can be obtained by scalp electrodes (Fig. 1.15–1B); these leads are designated Pg1 and Pg2 in the 10–20 placement system). No actual penetration of tissue occurs. The NP lead is a long (as long as 15 cm for adults), curved S- or Z-shaped insulated wire with a silver ball (the electrode) on the tip, which is rotated laterally after insertion in order to place the ball in contact with the roof of the nasopharynx. With a cooperative patient and a skilled technologist, the procedure can be well tolerated. Although this lead is presumed to be better positioned to detect activity from the orbitofrontal cortex, temporal pole, and hippocampus, it has numerous disadvantages. Chief among these are a high propensity to produce pulse and respiration artifacts and the fact that NP leads cannot be used when a deviated septum or nasal inflammatory process is present. They also are contraindicated with many psychiatric patients displaying behaviors, such as confusion, agitation, or belligerence who could pull the leads out, possibly lacerating the nasal passage. Their use also may interfere with obtaining a sleep-activated EEG and, not infrequently, otherwise cooperative patients simply refuse the procedure. 
Sphenoidal electrodes use a hollow needle through which a fine 

========663========

electrode that is insulated, except at the tip, is inserted between the zygoma and the sigmoid notch in the mandible, until it is in contact with the base of the skull lateral to the foramen ovale, the intended location. This is an invasive procedure that must be done by a physician and requires a signed consent form. While the goal of the sphenoidal electrode is to improve characterization of epileptiform activity with mesial–basal–temporal origins, the yield of positive results from these specialized electrodes over and above conventional scalp recordings has been somewhat controversial. Traditionally, sphenoidal electrode placement was conducted blindly, based only on anatomic measures and patient’s report of mandibular pain, but radiographic studies suggested that this approach did not reliably produce accurate localization with respect to distance from the foramen ovale. Fluoroscopically guided placement was subsequently introduced to better ensure accuracy. A substantial body of empirical evidence suggests that in general, while not routinely used by all epilepsy centers, sphenoidal leads improve detection of seizure activity with anterior temporal origin over temporal lobe scalp recordings. In some studies, treatment decisions based on sphenoidal recording were improved by as much as 90 percent following inconclusive results from noninvasive scalp recording. 
MONTAGE SELECTION. A common misconception is that the EEG records the voltage detected at each electrode site. Instead, each “squiggly line” on the EEG chart represents the shifting or oscillating difference in electrical potential between two electrodes. Thus, in a multichannel recording, the activity from each channel represents the shifting difference in voltage between two selected electrodes. When 16, 21, or more electrodes are placed on the head, the number of possible electrode pairs becomes large, and how these pairs are arranged among the recording channels can become complex. In EEG parlance, the way electrode pairs are arranged for a recording is called a montage, and although many montages are possible, only a limited number have become popular and useful. Prior to the advance of digital EEG equipment, selection of the montage was done prior to recording and would determine how the EEG was visualized in the paper record. When digital EEG equipment is used, montages are preprogrammed. Recording is performed using one montage, but the recorded (digitized) signal can be viewed offline in any configuration desired. 
Montages are designed to facilitate the detection of EEG abnormalities in different brain regions and to facilitate comparisons between left and right hemisphere activity. There are general guidelines for how montages are to be set up. The most important rule is simplicity for the sake of interpretation. Additional rules include the stipulation that odd numbers refer to the left side, whereas even numbers refer to right-side electrodes (Fig. 1.15–1A). Furthermore, left-side electrodes are routinely displayed at 

========664========

the top of or before right-side electrodes on the record. Similarly, anterior electrodes are displayed on top of or before more posteriorly placed electrodes. 
There are two main types of montages: referential and bipolar. With referential montages, all electrodes are referenced to a single common reference point that traditionally consisted of linked ears (the mastoid prominence can be used in place of the ear lobe), with variations being left or right ear reference alone, ipsilateral ear reference in which all electrodes in one hemisphere are referenced to the ear on that side, or a contralateral ear reference in which all electrodes in one hemisphere are referenced to the opposite-side ear. Given the risk of unintended distortion of EEG (causing artifactual asymmetry between hemispheres) that can occur when using references based on bilateral sites, particularly if impedance is not carefully balanced between the two electrodes, single, midline, sites including the nose or vertex (Cz) have been recommended in some cases. An in-depth discussion of arguments in favor and against the various reference options is beyond the scope of this chapter, but suffice it to say that no one option will be ideal (or collectively accepted) for all EEG recording applications. A host of “reference-free” recording approaches have also been employed in digital EEG recordings to circumvent a choice of reference altogether. Reference-free montages are based on common average or other mathematical derivations of signal from all electrodes such as current source density (CSD), defined by the second spatial derivative of the local field potential (LFP) (for detailed discussion of field potentials in EEG the reader is referred to the text of Nunez and Srinivasan, 2006). As some suggested guidelines, selection of a reference electrode should entail a location that is electrically neutral, uncontaminated by obvious physiological (e.g., mastoid reference can be sensitive to cardiac signal if not properly located) or motion (e.g., nose reference can be sensitive to head movement if not properly affixed) artifact, and relatively distal to electrodes in the region of interest (e.g., EEG activity most proximal to reference is most extensively subtracted). A referential montage would most likely be chosen for applications in which it is important to ascertain the magnitude of an abnormality, in terms of how large a sharp wave or slow wave is in microvolts, in one region compared to another. 
Bipolar montages, on the other hand, are useful (and, indeed, are much more widely used in clinical practice) for pinpointing the area of maximal abnormality or the exact source of abnormal activity. In bipolar montages, electrodes are referenced from one scalp location to an adjacent scalp location in chains of electrodes going across the head from front to back (Fig. 1.15–3) or from left to right (Fig. 1.15–4). The majority of abnormal cerebral activities tend to appear at the surface as negative potentials. 

========665========

FIGURE 1.15–3. Example of an 18-channel bipolar montage with anterior to posterior linkages. The numbers between electrode locations designate recording channels. Thus the number 6 means channel 6, which measures the difference in electrical potential between F3 and C3 electrodes. 

========666========

FIGURE 1.15–4.Exampleofa16-channeltransversebipolarmontage. 

========667========

FIGURE 1.15–5. Illustration of bipolar (phase-reversal) and monopolar (highest amplitude) localization of a focal negative spike discharge at the left anterior temporal (T1) electrode. See text for explanation. 
One can think of a given channel of EEG activity as being derived from two inputs. 
By convention, the first electrode of a pair constitutes input 1, whereas the second electrode provides input 2. Thus, in the electrode pair C3–P3, for example, the first electrode C3 constitutes input 1. The direction of deflection in the EEG waveform is based on whether input 1 is, relatively speaking, “more negative” or “less negative” (i.e., relatively more “positive”) than input 2. If the electrode designated as input 1 is closer to the source of 

========668========

a negative field and, hence, more “negative” than input 2, an upward deflection (i.e., negative to positive/up) will be observed as an indication of input 1’s closer proximity to the source of an event. Conversely, if input 1 is more distant from the source of the field than input 2 and, hence, less negative, then the deflection of the bipolar pair is downward (i.e., positive to negative/down). As bipolar pairs of electrodes move in a longitudinal or transverse direction from one side of a strong and highly localized negative field to the other side, the deflection changes direction across bipolar pairs as input 1 shifts from being relatively more negative to relatively more positive than input 2. This change of deflection is called a phase reversal and is a powerful method for localization of sharply focal abnormalities (Fig. 1.15–5). 
One additional montage configuration deserves special mention, because it may be particularly useful in psychiatric EEG. This is a montage that combines referential and bipolar electrode arrangements. Following four bipolar connections from the frontal regions through the temporal areas and ending in the occipital region, a referential placement connects each posterior temporal region (T5 and T6) to the opposite ear. This arrangement allows activity of low amplitude to be highlighted by the referential electrodes for further examination via the bipolar electrode pairs. This montage is commonly referred to as the Queen Square montage (Fig. 1.15–6). 
The appearance of EEG activity varies greatly from one recording montage to another. Large interelectrode distances often yields higher voltages, whereas a close spacing between electrodes in bipolar pairings tends to reduce voltage since both electrodes will overlie approximately the same portion of an electrical field and the signal common to both cancels out. Furthermore, specific EEG patterns visible in one montage may be distorted or even completely canceled out in another montage. Although some montages may permit a differentiation of activity between two or more brain regions, other montage choices may not do so. For example, EEG sleep patterns are well visualized and differentiated in central and occipital regions when a common (monopolar) reference recording is made. However, differentiation between central and occipital sleep activity is no longer possible when bipolar anterior–posterior linkages are used (C3–O1 and C4–O2), and, with transverse bipolar links between homologous electrodes, the sleep patterns may not be visible at all (Fig. 1.15–7). The issue is not merely academic. Discharges of interest to the electroencephalographer that are detectable in some recording montages may be completely or nearly undetectable, despite their neurophysiological presence, when a different montage is being used (Fig. 1.15–8). As previously mentioned, while traditional analog EEG required any change in montage to be done before recording, modern digital EEG is much more flexible in allowing changes of reference (i.e., re-referencing) or montage to 

========669========

be done as an offline procedure (i.e., after data is recorded). In the case of digital EEG a change in reference does not alter the EEG record, only the appearance of the data for purpose of visualization. 
FIGURE 1.15–6. Diagram of the Queen’s Square montage. This is an 18-channel montage modified to include two referential leads to highlight temporal lobe activity. 
EEG Amplifiers. Biopotentials recorded at the scalp are very small and require amplification (typically with voltage gain of 1,000 to 100,000 times or 60 to 100 dB) in order to be visualized and, subsequently, analyzed. Indeed, scalp potentials are typically smaller in scale than many sources of interference, including nonencephalographic biopotentials (e.g., myographic, ocular, cardiac), electric line noise, and shifts in voltage that occur with poor electrode conductance at recording surface. Therefore, a critical requirement for an EEG amplifier is the ability to boost brain signal while minimizing amplification of these contaminating signals. This is achieved through use of a differential amplifier using two input sources, 

========670========

one from the electrode and the other from a common system reference. The term “differential” refers to the manner in which signal is amplified, wherein the difference between the two input voltages is passed through to the amplification stage while any common voltage shared between inputs (regarded as noise) is rejected. The proportion of common voltage rejection relative to the amplified difference signal can be quantified as the common mode rejection ratio (CMRR), expressed in decibels (dB) as a unit of relative gain. As previously mentioned, the quality of EEG recording depends highly on the ability to achieve and maintain low impedance at scalp and reference sites. With regard to CMRR, it is especially important to ensure that impedance is balanced across electrodes, in that unequal impedance reduces the differential amplifier’s ability to detect, and reject, common mode signals. Early analog EEG amplifiers required adjustment of sensitivity (i.e., ratio of input voltage to pen deflection) to find the range of amplification that would boost low-voltage signals high enough to be visualized, but prevent high-voltage signals from pushing recording pens above their deflection limits, where “squaring off” of waveform peak would occur. The necessity to adjust sensitivity, or gain, in this manner is eliminated in modern EEG amplifiers that employ analogue-to-digital (A/D) conversion, replacing pen and paper with software for control of EEG acquisition, visualization, and data storage. Most software allows input gain can be adjusted as needed for visualization at any point during EEG acquisition, with no consequence to the actual recording of the signal. 
FIGURE 1.15–7. Alteration of appearance of brain waves (sleep patterns) with changes of recording montages. Note that the monopolar montage (top four channels) yields higher amplitudes and greater differentiation between central and occipital activity. Similar input to members of an electrode pair (C3–O1 and C4–O2) can reduce voltage in the bipolar derivation. Note the absence of differentiation between central and occipital activity in bipolar derivation. Note extreme cancellation of activity in the last two bipolar derivations. 

========671========

FIGURE 1.15–8. A: Fourteen-per-second and six-per-second positive spike discharges, independent left and right temporal–parietal–occipital area (monopolar montage). B: The top two channels show these discharges with the same monopolar montage as channels 3 and 4 in A, whereas lower channels show bipolar cancellation of the discharges even though all electrodes in montage A are present. The female patient was 32 years of age 

========672========

with a closed head injury. 
A feature found both in traditional analogue and modern digital EEG amplifiers is an online filter, placed before the sampling stage, where it functions to limit bandwidth of incoming signal in accord with sampling theorem. This filter is set to the amplifier’s Nyquist frequency, defining the highest frequency of a discrete signal that can be accurately characterized at a specific sampling rate. High signal frequency relative to sampling rate can produce aliasing in the recording, a distorted rendering of a sinusoid that results from undersampling. Nyquist theorem dictates that the sampling frequency (FS) must be at least twice the frequency of the highest frequency contained in the signal (FC). Accordingly, Nyquist frequency is constrained by amplifier sampling rate, as expressed mathematically in the equation FNyquist = FC < FS/2, with both signal frequency and sampling rate measured in cycles/samples per second using the common unit Hertz (Hz). Thus, the first stage of filtering may be regarded as an, “antialiasing filter,” used to attenuate EEG frequencies at and above the limit that can be accurately sampled. Aliasing has become less of a concern over time as amplifiers used in clinical applications sample minimally at rates of 256 to 512 Hz, which is more than sufficient to characterize EEG within the range of most human brain functions (e.g., ~1 to 100 Hz). Indeed, modern digital amplifiers are capable of sampling well beyond 1,000 Hz, and usually up to 20 kHz, though doing so comes at the cost of much larger data files, with higher computer processing speed and storage space requirements, and little useful information gained. One notable exception to this generalization is testing of the auditory brainstem response (ABR), which can include events sampled at rates of 7 kHz to 50 kHz using specialized amplifiers. 
Digital Recording. Over the last 30 years, the analog EEG traces of the old EEG machines have been largely replaced by computer systems providing an analog to digital conversion of the recorded EEG signals, as well as amplification, digital filtering, storing, and quantitative analysis of multichannel EEG. Digital systems are now commonplace in laboratory and clinical settings, are relatively inexpensive, and offer several practical advantages. They can help reduce the space problem of storing paper records over many years and also allow review of an EEG record using multiple montages, filters, and vertical (gain or sensitivity) and horizontal scaling (e.g., paper speed) selected after the original recording. Moreover, digital recording systems allow many new and exciting possibilities for EEG signal processing and quantification that rely not only on time-series analysis but also spectral-frequency, time–frequency, related methods of coherence and phase synchrony, and spatial–temporal source localization and modeling (to be discussed in subsequent sections). 

========673========

FREQUENCY FILTER SETTINGS. Nearly all of the EEG activity that is analyzed for clinical or research purposes falls within the frequency range of 0.5 to 50.0 Hz (and occasionally up to 100 Hz). Filters are used essentially to limit the range of frequencies to a bandwidth containing features of interest. It has become conventional in clinical EEG to use a low-pass filter setting of 70 Hz, which means that EEG frequencies above this filter setting become progressively attenuated while those below the filter setting as allowed to “pass” through and are retained for further analysis. At the other end of the spectrum, most laboratories also employ a high-pass filter between 0.5 and 1.0 Hz to reduce the registration of frequencies below this level. Because the EEG is represented as a two-dimensional image of amplitude over time, with the visualized waveform representing a summation of all frequencies, a band-pass filter (combines a high- and low-pass filter) may be used to isolate discrete frequency bands (e.g., alpha band, 8 to 12 Hz) of interest from the broadband signal. 
Unfortunately, scalp electrodes pick up a variety of electrical potentials of noncerebral origin, and many of these have frequencies within or close to the EEG frequency spectrum. Frequency filters may, to some degree, mitigate against the distorting effects of frequencies generated by artifacts. However, filters must be used judiciously and with caution, because they also can filter out real brain waves that one wishes to observe. For example, slow waves generated by changes in skin conductance during sweating (galvanic skin response) can be of sufficiently high magnitude to completely obliterate genuine EEG activity in the affected recording channels (bilateral frontal–anterior temporal areas around the forehead are particularly prone). Raising the high-pass filter setting to 5 Hz effectively eliminates this source of contamination in the recording (Fig. 1.15–9) but does so at the expense of attenuating any real generalized or focal slow activity that also may be present. It is also common practice to adjust the low-pass filter downward from 70 to 35 or even 15 Hz to eliminate or reduce unwanted electromyographic (EMG) activity from the recording (Fig. 1.15–10). Again, the choice to do this involves a compromise, because attenuating high-frequency activity may obscure the accurate detection of certain fast spike discharges. Of note, adjusting filters in this way is permissible for clinical applications, with the goal of identifying significant features at the individual level. Naturally, the selection of filter settings in research applications must be kept standard across data samples, as not to systematically introduce differences that would invalidate the measure, and would be based primarily on resolution of the frequencies important to the experiment or neurophysiological processes being evaluated. 

========674========

FIGURE 1.15–9.Effectoflow-frequencyfiltersettingonperspirationartifact(F7andT3 electrodes) during sleep recordings. Adjusting low-frequency filter upward to 5 Hz completely eliminates the slow rhythm artifact and also eliminates the normal slow wave components of sleep but does not alter the faster 14-Hz sleep spindles. 
EEG CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES 
While the appearance of the raw EEG may vary somewhat between individuals, the range of frequencies, voltages, and waveforms that characterize the normal EEG during wake and sleep has been well established. The normal EEG tracing is composed of a complex mixture of many different frequencies, and based upon modern spectral analysis, consistent recognizable patterns can be observed in most healthy individuals. Some frequency bands are expressed more strongly over some cortical regions than others (e.g., alpha over occipital cortex). Moreover, the frequency profile varies considerably as the subject being recorded transitions from alert wakefulness into sleep. Following the lead of Berger, discrete frequency bands within the broad EEG frequency spectrum are designated with Greek letters. However, it should be noted that the sequence of Greek letters is not entirely logical, and in fact, derives from historical precedents. For example, the term alpha rhythm discovered by Berger was chosen because it was the first rhythm detected and described. By contrast, the designation theta derives from the fact that activity in this frequency range was initially thought to originate in thalamus. 
Normal Intrinsic Frequencies 
A brief discussion of the most established and recognizable intrinsic rhythms follows. Examples of each of these rhythms can be found in Figure 1.15–11. Intrinsic rhythms, which provide descriptions, examples, and spectral analysis (time × frequency) for each of the rhythms described below. For a thorough treatment of this topic, please refer to Chang, Schomer, and Neidermeyer (2011). 
Delta. Delta activity (≤3 Hz) is not present in the normal waking EEG, but is a prominent feature of deeper stages of sleep, particularly stage 3. A slower delta rhythm (<1 Hz) is also observed when an individual is under anesthesia. The delta rhythm has been shown to be primarily generated by thalamocortical circuits. The presence of significant generalized or focal 

========675========

delta in the waking EEG is strongly indicative of a pathophysiological process. 
FIGURE 1.15–10. Effect of adjusting high-frequency filter setting on muscle potential artifact (generated by having the patient grind his teeth repeatedly). Muscle potential seen at the “normal” filter setting of 70 Hz is attenuated when the filter setting is lowered to 35 Hz and completely removed when it is set at 15 Hz. Lowering the high-frequency filter introduces the risk of attenuating or removing (i.e., filtering out) abnormal spike discharges from the tracing. 
FIGURE 1.15–11.Exampleofthetypicalintrinsicbrainrhythmsobservedinthenormal EEG. The middle panel illustrates a prototypal example of each rhythm in the raw EEG. The far right panel demonstrates how each rhythm would appear after a time × frequency transform. 

========676========

Theta. EEG with a frequency of 4 to 7 Hz is referred to as theta activity. A small amount of sporadic, arrhythmic, and isolated theta activity can be seen in many normal waking EEGs, particularly in frontal–temporal regions. While ongoing theta activity is somewhat limited in the waking EEG, it can be a feature of drowsiness during sleep tracing, and is highly prominent in stage 1 sleep. Brief periods of theta activity have also been shown to be associated with mental activities such as problem solving and processes related to memory. The fact that theta appears to be generated in hippocampus supports the role of theta in memory. Theta rhythms are also generated in the neocortex, particularly during working memory tasks. Excessive theta during waking states, generalized or focal in nature, suggests a focal pathological process such as CBF reduction or metabolic encephalopathies. 
Alpha. Highly rhythmic EEG with a frequency range from 8 to 12 Hz is termed alpha activity, and was the first brain rhythm to be described by Berger in 1929 (i.e., the Berger rhythm). Alpha constitutes the dominant brain wave frequency of the normal closed-eye waking EEG, and is also common in states of relaxation or during periods of minimal mental activity. Hence, alpha has routinely been interpreted as constituting an EEG correlate of an “idling brain.” In middle-aged adults, the vast majority of individuals exhibit an alpha frequency at, or close to, 10 Hz, whereas, with normal geriatric populations, a slower alpha frequency of 8 to 9 Hz is not uncommon. Alpha activity is most prominent over the posterior cortex, particularly the parietal, posterior temporal, and occipital cortex, with the occipital region being best suited to detect this activity. In fact, the neural generators of alpha activity appear to be visual cortex, with some influence from visual thalamus. The detection of alpha activity diminishes as one records from more anterior locations, and this frequency is rare at prefrontal electrode sites. Alpha activity is abolished, or at least severely attenuated, by eye opening. Further, alpha activity also disappears as one enters sleep (indeed, one of the criteria for stage 1 sleep is <50 percent alpha activity per epoch). Alpha activity can be highly responsive to cognitive activity, such as focused attention or concentration. For example, under closed-eye recording conditions, alpha can be blocked or attenuated by engaging in visual imagery, numeric calculation, or almost anything requiring significant concentration (Fig. 1.15–12). Alpha frequency can be increased or decreased by a wide variety of pharmacological, metabolic, or endocrine variables. 
Beta. Frequencies in the 13 to 29 Hz range are termed beta waves, and they are one of the dominant frequencies in normal adult waking EEGs, particularly over frontal–central regions. Beta rhythms are typically associated with alertness, and it is not uncommon for beta to appear as 

========677========

runs of rhythmic activity as opposed to sporadic isolated waves. Mixed frequency EEG, including beta, is also observed in REM sleep. In addition, research has shown that beta frequencies are correlated with peripheral EMG activity, suggesting that rhythmic beta in the motor cortex plays a key role in the generation of motor commands. The voltage of beta activity is also almost always of a smaller amplitude than that of the lower frequencies described above. Hence, along with gamma (see below), beta rhythms are not as easily visualized in the raw EEG compared to delta, theta, and alpha (Fig. 1.15–11). 
Gamma. One of the most studied EEG frequencies during the past several years is the gamma rhythm, which is typically considered to be activity in the 30 to 80 Hz range (note that some investigators extend gamma up to 100 Hz). Gamma rhythms were largely ignored throughout most of the history of EEG research, which was due to in part to (1) recording methodologies, and (2) the notion that such higher frequencies were nonneural in origin (i.e., noise). However, seminal work in the 1990s by researchers such as Rodolfo Llinás, Andreas Engel, Wolf Singer, and others, demonstrated that transient gamma rhythms play a key role the integration or “binding” together of neural networks in order to generate coherent cortical representations. Since that time, the role of gamma rhythms in human sensation, perception, and cognition has gained wide support. Abnormalities in gamma rhythms are now thought to be a core feature of several psychiatric disorders, most notably schizophrenia. 

========678========

FIGURE 1.15–12. Resting, eyes-closed, awake electroencephalography recording. Effect of mental concentration on alpha activity. While instructed to keep the eyes closed, at the heavy vertical line, the subject is asked to divide 389 by 7. Note immediate blocking of alpha activity. 
EEG Artifacts 
EEG artifacts, as previously alluded to, refer to any source of recorded activity that is not of cerebral origin and, therefore, contaminates accurate characterization of the desired signal. The various sources of artifact are unfortunately abundant, but can generally be reduced to two sources: physiological and extraphysiological. Physiological artifacts are real biosignals recorded from the patient, but generated by sources other than the brain. Extraphysiological artifacts are those caused by external sources, including EEG or other medical equipment, and typically electronic devices located on the person or in the recording environment. Familiarity with the appearance of each artifact in the EEG, and its associated source, is critical for the EEG technician as most of these contaminating signals can be mitigated during recording but tend to be much more difficult to remove from the recorded data. 
Physiological Artifacts. Important physiologic features to be aware of during EEG recording and interpretation are ocular artifact, muscle artifact, perspiration, and cardiac artifact, though others (e.g., lingual motion) also exist. Eye blinks and vertical shifts in eye movement can be prominently observed in the EEG record, identified by rapid changes of voltage over brief intervals over frontal electrode sites, particularly the frontal poles (Fig. 1.15–13). Blinks and vertical electrooculogram (VEOG) responses can be further captured in EEG recoding by affixing electrodes above and below the orbit of one eye as a bipolar channel. Similarly, horizontal eye movement, or “saccades,” produces a characteristic artifact that appears as a change in voltage that tends to flatten over a brief period of time with phase reversal observed between left- and right-sided frontal electrode channels (the side of positive deflection indicates the direction of eye movement). Like VEOG, horizontal electrooculogram (HEOG) responses are detected in scalp EEG channels (particularly F7 and F8) but optimal characterization benefits from a bipolar channel of electrodes placed near the outer canthi of the eyes. Fortunately, several “blink correction” algorithms have been developed and can be employed in digital EEG data to remove VEOG/HEOG artifact from the EEG record (Fig. 1.15– 14). 

========679========

FIGURE 1.15–13. Electrooculographic (EOG) artifact. Panel A: Vertical EOG (VEOG) activity caused by eye blinks. VEOG recorded from electrodes affixed above and below orbit of right eye, also evident in frontal poles (Fp1, Fp2) and adjacent frontal sites with attenuated signal distributed posteriorly. Panel B: Horizontal EOG (HEOG) causes by lateral shifts in gaze, recorded at electrodes affixed bilaterally at outer canthi of eyes. 
EMG activity of the temporalis muscle, indicating jaw clenching or chewing, and of the frontalis muscle, indicating tension and contraction of the forehead, appear as high-frequency artifact that can spread across a large portion scalp electrodes (Fig. 1.15–15). It is more difficult to correct EEG for this type of EMG artifact offline, and could result in rejection of large segments of data if prominent. As mentioned previously, a low-pass filter may be used to attenuate EMG artifact but use of this option may equally affect frequencies of interest. Therefore, it is best to reduce this form of artifact during EEG recording by training the patient to relax facial muscles beforehand and stopping recording, as necessary, to remind them. Obviously, anything that contributes to use of these muscles, such as squinting to read in a dark room, chewing gum, or talking, should be avoided during EEG recording. 
Perspiration artifacts (galvanic skin response) can be detected by a slow, undulating, drift in signal over long durations (e.g., 2 seconds), thus are easy to differentiate from cerebrally generated activity, however, also resembles slow roving eye motion. Perspiration artifact is caused by sweat (sodium chloride) interacting with electrolytic gel and electrode metals and tend to be most prominent over frontal electrode sites (Fig. 1.15–16). Properly temperature-regulated recording environments and instructions to patients to dress in layers that can be removed as needed are the best 

========680========

solutions for avoiding perspiration, which can be difficult to reduce once it begins. Less frequently seen are artifacts from an electrocardiogram (ECG), though certain physical characteristics of the patient, such as a short neck or heavy, “barrel-chested,” build, tend to increase their presence. ECG artifacts reflect both electrical and mechanical actions of the heart, and can be detected by a consistent, rhythmic pattern with a period that aligns closely to pulse rate (thus, near 1 Hz), and are observed most commonly in temporal electrode sites and references placed at ears or mastoid (when electrodes placed too low and nearer to carotid artery). Although ECG artifact is not likely to directly affect many scalp EEG channels, the intrusion of ECG into reference channels could give this appearance during data acquisition using a reference montage or after data has been re- referenced offline. These problems are then best avoided by moving reference channels, when possible, to a location where ECG signal is not picked up. 
FIGURE 1.15–14. Ocular correction. Panel A: EEG shows ocular motion artifact on VEOG and HEOG channels with propagation to scalp electrodes. Panel B shows the same data following offline ocular correction by Gratton & Coles method. Note that correction is applied only to scalp electrodes in this case, leaving the original artifact present in VEOG and HEOG. 

========681========

FIGURE 1.15–15.Electromyographicartifact.PanelA:Jaw(temporalis)muscletension. Panel B: Forehead (frontalis) muscle tension. These artifacts can typically be ameliorated by asking subject to relax facial muscles when observed. 

========682========

FIGURE 1.15–16. Sweat drift artifact in EEG record referenced to mastoid. Drift at frontal poles (electrode Fp1, Fp2) suggests sweat on forehead. Drift common across remaining scalp electrodes suggests sweat at mastoid reference electrodes. 
Extraphysiological Artifacts. The main sources of extraphysiological artifacts have to do with equipment and environmental issues that can be minimized through careful attention to proper electrode setup, cleaning and maintenance of equipment between uses, and mitigation of ambient electromagnetic noise sources in the recording room. Electrical devices such as computer monitors, lights, and poorly shielded power cables emit 60 Hz signal, the line frequency of AC delivery in the United States (50 Hz in most other parts of the world). Electrodes with high or unstable impedance, due to poor contact with gel/scalp or break in lead will be particularly susceptible to picking up ambient noise in the recording environment, which is identified by persistent 60 Hz activity that appears as a fast sine wave imposed over background EEG (Fig. 1.15–17). Some EEG acquisition software packages enable viewing EEG in spectral frequency mode, which can quickly identify the characteristic peak at 60 Hz if there is any doubt. 

========683========

Maintaining proper electrode contact over long EEG recordings may require reapplication of gel, which can always be a first troubleshooting step for addressing with noisy channels. Detection of a connection problem, which may also be caused by electrode movement, is not difficult at as the resulting effect on recorded signal in no way resembles true EEG (Fig. 1.15–18). In these cases, there tend to be very large changes of voltage, which may “rail” out of range at gain settings used for regular EEG monitoring, with no regularity in the signal. 
FIGURE 1.15–17. Panel A: 60-Hz ambient noise in unreferenced EEG viewed at range of 100 μV. Panel B: Power spectral analysis by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) depicting prominent 60 Hz activity in Panel A segment. Panel C: Panel A EEG segment viewed in bipolar reference montage at 100 μV. Note that 60-Hz activity remains present in EEG but cancels out as common signal when referenced. 
One common artifact that is more difficult to prevent is the electrode is a “pop,” appearing as a steep and rapid deflection in voltage, usually isolated to a single electrode (unless a reference or a channel included in a bipolar montage) and occurrence (or may reoccur a few times sporadically), that is caused by the discharge of electrical potential between the scalp and electrode where electrical charges can store (as if in a capacitor). The pop is the only extraphysiological artifact mentioned here (though this list is not exhaustive) that may resemble abnormal EEG activity, with some characteristics similar to epileptiform activity. Importantly, pops can be distinguished from true neurophysiological paroxysmal activity by the fact that they tend to occur in only one electrode at a time, thus do not give the appearance of voltage change from an electrical field source, and appear with an asymmetric morphology characterized by relatively steep rise and slow recovery. These characteristics should differentiate pops from interictal spikes to the trained eye. 

========684========

EEG Quantification and Feature Detection 
EEG recording, combined with stimulus-evoked paradigms and experimental measures of mental task performance, provides powerful methodology for studying neural dynamics of human brain function and pathology. EEG data is dimensional and complex, based on a time series of events sampled with high temporal resolution (i.e., millisecond level) and distributed spatially across multiple scalp locations (e.g., montages of 32 to 256 channels). If one considers a sampling rate of 256 samples per second, across 32 scalp channels, for 10 minutes of recording, each parameter representing a lower bound of what is possible for digital EEG recording and typical for a recording session (which may last hours), the resulting data matrix could conceivably include 4,915,200 discrete data points. While examples of clinical EEG discussed thus far would not entail a detailed analysis of each sample point by electrode (this would never be done under any circumstance), with objectives that are routinely achieved by visual inspection of data over time scales of several seconds, such abundant data no doubt contains important features that cannot be ascertained (or even seen) through visual inspection and clinical judgment alone. The advent of digital EEG recording technology, among other advantages over analog paper EEG, makes highly detailed EEG analysis possible through computerized signal processing. Basic processes such as segmentation, dividing the time series record into shorter periods or epochs based on experimental events, and averaging over multiple segments (consistencies in signal average together while noise averages out), provide efficient means of isolating important features in data, upon which a number of additional signal extraction methods can be applied. Digital EEG analysis is broadly referred to as “Quantitative EEG,” abbreviated to Q-EEG or qEEG, emphasizing measurement of the magnitude and differentiation of features contained within the EEG rather than qualitative decisions over whether or not an observed feature indicates a pathophysiological process. However, even while the heavy computational burden is now passed on to the machine, Q-EEG still requires the same human judgments concerning data quality and interpretation. When the issue of artifact contamination of the Q-EEG is not properly addressed, one has a situation described a generation ago by computer programmers, namely, “garbage in–garbage out,” leading to erroneous conclusions of the processed data. Software used for Q-EEG analysis includes automatic or semiautomatic functions for removal of artifact based on thresholds for acceptable amplitude or change in amplitude over time, which can be used to mark and remove some sources of EEG contamination. However, these artifact rejection procedures cannot typically mitigate all problematic conditions, such as low-frequency activity of a drowsy patient, and visual data inspection should always be 

========685========

undertaken as a first step of analysis. 
FIGURE 1.15–18. Physical electrode movement in referential montage. Panel A shows effect at single electrode (C4) suggesting electrode is being physically shifted in position and unseated from point of scalp contact. Panel B shows consistent pattern of shift across all electrodes, indicating movement at the reference electrode site. 
Beyond the initial data cleaning, the technician or experimenter is faced with many more technical decisions regarding the selection of time points and signal extraction methods used to best characterize the neurophysiological phenomena under examination. It is sensible, if not required, for some processing steps to be taken before others, but each involve a number of decisions over parameters for which there is not common agreement or standardization. Furthermore, there is usually more than one way to implement a given function, which may differ between software packages, and the user (typically lacking extensive training in computer science and engineering) may be unaware of the intricacies and assumptions involved in each. There are also a number of free, open- source, toolkits available for EEG analysis that enable the inclined user to customize various analysis routines. Therefore, while digital recording and analysis greatly increases the capacity to explore and extract features from EEG, the application of such methods remains to be more of an exquisite art than a standardized practice. 
The most commonly used method for EEG quantification is the spectral analysis, principally based on the Fourier transform. The Fourier transform decomposes a signal, represented as a function of time, into its constituent frequency components. Given the analogy of a chord played in music, playing the chord as an arpeggio (e.g., the A major chord played as individual notes A-C#-E) enables the listener to appreciate the frequency and loudness of each note as a component of chord’s overall harmonic quality. In a similar way, the Fourier transform represents signal as a measure of spectral power (square of signal amplitude) according to total power of the broadband (e.g., chord) and band power of individual 

========686========

frequencies (e.g., notes). In EEG signal processing, the Fourier transform is most commonly implemented as the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), which applies an efficient algorithm for computing the Fourier transform achieved by reducing the total number of samples submitted to computation by their base 2 logarithm. Applying FFT therefore assumes that the data represents a fixed length waveform with a total number of samples that can be expressed as a factor of 2-to-the-nth power (e.g., 64, 128, 256, 512). Frequency resolution of the FFT is also dependent on the length of the data sampled, with longer segments of data needed to resolve lower frequencies. For example, the lowest frequency that could be characterized accurately using a segment length of 1 second is 1 Hz, while resolving 0.1 Hz signal would require segment length of 10 seconds. When using FFT, it is also important to keep in mind that the analysis treats all samples within the segment equally without regard to time, therefore, is insensitive to time-varying functions and most appropriate for signals assumed to be stationary. Quantification of changes in spectral power that occur over a period of time is made possible through time–frequency decomposition. A variation on the FFT, called the short-time Fourier transform (STFT), has been developed for this purpose, but EEG analyses typically employ more sophisticated algorithms based on the wavelet transform. The theory and mathematical computation involved in the wavelet transform is beyond the scope of this chapter, but an eloquent description written in context of EEG analysis can be found in the methods handbook of Todd Handy. The basic point to keep in mind in differentiating FFT, or time to frequency transformation, and wavelet, or time–frequency transformation, is that frequency extraction by FFT applies to the entire time window of analysis (signal is not localized in time) while wavelet analysis provides localization of frequency extraction to each sample of the time window. The latter is advantageous when examining change in frequency component structure as signals evolve over time, and so tends to be the more appropriate analysis for perceptual-cognitive experiments. That said, there are still cases where FFT may be preferred given that time resolution does come at a cost to frequency resolution. 
In both the clinical and research literature, several types of time– frequency outcome measures are often discussed, which vary depending the paradigms used to elicit them and the signal processing techniques utilized. Most commonly, oscillatory activity measured by time–frequency decomposition is differentiated into three categories: transient evoked, steady-state evoked, and induced (Fig. 1.15–19). 
Q-EEG using frequency-based analyses has contributed largely to the appreciation of EEG as an ensemble of neurophysiology generated oscillatory components with unique functional properties. For instance, it has been suggested that the delta rhythm, traditionally regarded as a pathological finding in the awake EEG, has been related to internal 

========687========

concentration (i.e., conditions in which subjects have to disregard external input). Further examples include the association of frontally generated theta activity with encoding and working memory functions, the slow alpha band (7.5 to 9.5 Hz) with attentional processes, fast alpha band (9.5 to 13.5 Hz) with memory retrieval, and beta activity with the integration of sensory information. Furthermore, functions associated with frequencies above 30 Hz, the so-called gamma band, have been more recently discovered and are currently a major focus in psychiatric research. The demonstration of a stimulus-induced gamma oscillatory activity in the mammalian brain was the first empirical evidence that synchronization of neural groups (individually coding for different aspects of the sensory input) serve a basic “binding” process in the CNS, enabling information communicated over sensory afferents to combine in forming a unified percept. While high- frequency gamma synchronization is thought to support communication of short-range local networks, slower oscillatory rhythms have been implicated in cognitive processes requiring integration over large cortical distances (e.g., among areas of different sensory modalities) that extend over longer periods of time (e.g., memory encoding). 
FIGURE 1.15–19. Transient and steady-stated evoked activity are phase- and time- locked oscillations (A and B) elicited by discrete or steady-state sensory stimuli. For both of these types of activity, averaging across trials has the effect of cancelling out non–phase- locked oscillations (due to destructive interference), leaving the evoked response intact and magnified. Hence, time–frequency analysis can be performed on the averaged EEG (i.e., after averaging all the individual trials). By contrast, induced activity is typically elicited during higher perceptual processing, for example, during the perception of coherent motion or of illusory shapes (see Panel C). These responses are often non time-locked (jittered across time from trial to trial). Hence, averaging the trials cancels out the response of interest due to destructive interference, and is not visible in the time–frequency transform (bottom of Panel C, left). However, these responses can be detected if time– frequency analysis is performed on the single trials, and the time–frequency transforms of individual trials are then averaged (Panel C, right). (See color atlas.) (Adapted from Skosnik PD, Cortes-Briones JA. Electroencephalography (EEG) and cannabis: from event-related 

========688========

potentials (ERPs) to oscillations. In: Preedy VR, ed. The Neuropathology of Drug Addictions and Substance Misuse. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science; 2016.) 
Time- and frequency-based analyses mentioned thus far have paved the wave for more precise characterization of neural activity and function, however, may fall short in providing a fully accurate representation of neural communication in that the information extracted by these methods remains spatially localized (e.g., analyzed based on 1 electrode or field of electrodes). Furthermore, while these methods effectively quantify the magnitude of neural activity as an average representation of time, the degree of consistency in activation across time segments is lost. Relationships between frequency ensembles located at different spatial locations or occurring at different time points, determined as a measure of synchronization, can be ascertained using coherence measures. Coherence analysis follows frequency (e.g., FFT) and time–frequency (e.g., wavelet) decomposition of signal, and is applied to a complex form of these data as a measure of strength of association in the linear dependence of two signals. Coherence analysis can be applied to stationary and time-series data as a measure of relationship of spectral power between two regions (i.e., spatial coherence), dependence of one frequency on another (i.e., cross-spectrum coherence), and of consistency in the phasic cycle of oscillatory activity over repeated trials (i.e., intertrial coherence). Taken together, the combination of spectral power and coherence measures greatly enhances the ascertainment of neural dynamics comprising the human EEG, and increase capability to understand the functional interactions of brain areas on a large spatial scale. 
Q-EEG Topographic Analysis and Source Analysis 
Computerized EEG topography (CET) or Q-EEG mapping was developed for multichannel Q-EEG data. The technique enables the construction of a bi- or three-dimensional matrix for a topographic representation of Q-EEG parameters, such as instant amplitude or band power (Fig. 1.15–20). 
Matrix points that do not correspond to recording electrodes are calculated by interpolating the values of the nearest three or four recording electrodes. As for other imaging techniques, statistical probability maps can also be implemented for comparisons between different subject populations or experimental conditions. Color-coded maps make the multichannel information more immediately intelligible; however, the topographic information provided by the technique is critically dependent on the reference electrode used for EEG recording (Fig. 1.15–21). To address this issue, several transformations have been proposed that provide reference-independent data, including average-reference (i.e., subtraction of the mean of all electrodes from each electrode value) and surface Laplacian or CSD approaches previously mentioned. However, it is 

========689========

imperative to realize that the topography at the scalp, even when resulting from reference-independent calculations, does NOT allow physiological inferences on the underlying brain generators, due to the so-called inverse solution problem. Essentially, this problem appreciates the imprecision of localizing sources of field potentials as recorded at the level of the scalp, since numerous neural activation patterns can generate the same scalp topographies (Figs. 1.15–21 and 1.15–22). 
FIGURE 1.15–20. Quantitative electroencephalography maps. Instant amplitude map on the left and alpha absolute power map on the right. Units are μV and μV2, respectively. 
FIGURE 1.15–21. Quantitative electroencephalography (EEG) maps. Mean amplitude maps obtained from the same segment of EEG data (2 seconds) using different references. Left-side map, linked earlobes reference; middle map, Cz reference; right-side map, 

========690========

average-reference. Units are μV. 
FIGURE 1.15–22. Clozapine-induced electroencephalography (EEG) alterations. On the left a sample of the baseline EEG of a 17-year-old, first episode, drug-naive patient with schizophrenia is shown. On the right a sample of the EEG recorded in the same subject, six hours after a single dose of clozapine (0.36 mg/kg) is shown. A high-amplitude, slow wave complex, with maximal amplitude over the right hemisphere, is observed. In both EEG samples, the interval between two vertical lines is 1 second. 
Thus, in 1989 Frank Duffy, Dietrich Lehman, Fernando Lopes da Silva, and other eminent scientists formed the International Society for Brain Electromagnetic Topography (ISBET), established to promote the application and further development of techniques investigating brain electromagnetic activity, topography, and source analysis. In recent years, different algorithms have been proposed to solve the inverse problem. They can be divided into equivalent current dipole models and current distributed source models. According to recent comparative studies, the dipole models are suitable only when a single source is expected. Among the distributed source methods, low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (LORETA), or more recently, standardized low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA) have proven greater effectiveness in terms of localization error, particularly when multiple sources and noise are present. Briefly, the sLORETA method is a properly standardized discrete, three-dimensional distributed, linear, minimum norm inverse solution. The particular form of standardization used in sLORETA endows the tomography with the property of exact localization to test point sources, yielding images of standardized current density with exact localization, albeit with low spatial resolution (i.e., neighboring neuronal sources will be highly correlated). sLORETA is currently a method of choice since it has no localization bias even in the presence of 

========691========

studies 
measurement and biological noise. In the current implementation of sLORETA, computations are made in a realistic head model using the MNI152 template with the three-dimensional solution space restricted to cortical gray matter, as determined by the probabilistic Talairach atlas. Thus, sLORETA images represent the standardized electric activity at each voxel in neuroanatomic Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space as the exact magnitude of the estimated current density (Fig. 1.15–23). Several 
consistency 
neuroimaging methods such as fMRI. The LORETA/sLORETA software is based on the pioneering work of Roberto Pascual-Marqui and his group, 
have 
reported 
and 
relevant 
references 
between 
sLORETA 
and 
other 
can 
be 
freely 
downloaded 
(http://www.uzh.ch/keyinst/loreta.htm). 
Status of Q-EEG in Applied Clinical Practice 
Despite advances in EEG signal extraction enabled by digital technology, there are few specific conditions for which Q-EEG has gained acceptance as a clinical diagnostic tool, and in these cases it is used only to enhance interpretation of conventional clinical EEG. According to the AETNA Health Insurance list of approved indications (last reviewed April 28, 2015), Q-EEG is medically necessary only as an adjunct to traditional EEG 
for 
the 
following 
conditions 
http://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/200_299/0221.html, 
September 15, 2015): 
(from accessed 
1. For ambulatory recording of EEG to facilitate subsequent expert visual 
EEG interpretation; or 
2. For continuous EEG monitoring by frequency trending to detect early, 
acute intracranial complications in the operating room or ICU; or 3. For evaluation of certain members with symptoms of cerebrovascular 
disease whose neuroimaging and routine EEG studies are not conclusive; 
or 
4. For evaluation of dementia and encephalopathy when the diagnosis 
remains unresolved after initial clinical evaluation; or 
5. For screening for possible epileptic seizures in high-risk ICU members; 
or 
6. For screening for possible epileptic spikes or seizures in long-term EEG 
monitoring; or 
7. For topographic voltage and dipole analysis in presurgical evaluations 
for intractable epilepsy. 

========692========

FIGURE 1.15–23. Example of EEG source analysis using sLORETA. The time–frequency transform on the left indicates a burst of transient gamma activity to an auditory click stimulus, which was localized to primary auditory cortex (right). (See color atlas.) 
The list of indications described is no more inclusive than those recommended nearly 20 years prior by the ACNS and American Academy of Neurology (AAN) Executive Board’s publication, appearing in the journal Neurology in 1997. Also consistent with conclusions of the ACNS/AAN report, AETNA considers the use of Q-EEG “experimental and investigational” for all other indications due to lack of adequate scientific evidence to support its clinical utility. Psychiatric conditions listed explicitly among unsupported indications include alcohol and SUDs, Asperger syndrome and other ASDs, attention deficit disorders, major depression and bipolar disorder, panic disorder, and schizophrenia. Furthermore, despite favorable reports in the research literature, Q-EEG has yet to receive approval for use in predicting efficacy of a psychotropic medication. 
EEG IN APPLIED CLINICAL PRACTICE 
Despite the fact that EEG originated in psychiatry, the strongest initial impetus for its use came from neurology, particularly the study of epilepsy. The years from 1934 to 1940 saw a marked proliferation of EEG studies focused on structural brain lesions and a variety of seizure disorders. In 1934, the team led by Fred Gibbs discovered the classic three-per-second spike-and-wave complex, which proved to be specific to petit mal absence attacks. Before the decade ended, they had described EEG patterns associated with grand mal and myoclonic seizures and a diffuse spike-and- wave pattern that was slower in frequency than petit mal (and given the confusing name of petit mal variant) and that was associated with grand mal seizures and a high incidence of mental retardation. They also introduced the term psychomotor seizures (now complex partial seizures [CPSs]) and described the EEG manifestations characterizing an ictal psychomotor attack. Later, in 1947 and 1948, they described the anterior temporal spike focus that became the interictal EEG correlate of this disorder. On the other side of the neurological coin, the study of structural 

========693========

brain lesions was advanced through landmark EEG discoveries of the 1930s to 1950s. In 1935, Otfried Foerster and Helmut Altenberger reported from that focal slow waves in the EEG recording often appeared near brain tumors and, 1 year later, Grey Walter made a major advance by demonstrating a technique for EEG localization of brain tumors. Denis Williams at Oxford subsequently began using EEG recordings to study and localize traumatic intracranial injuries received during World War II. Finally, through the collaboration of neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield and psychologist (turned neurophysiology research) Herbert Jasper, who brought EEG to the Montreal Neurologic Institute in 1937, a technique for direct intracranial EEG recording termed electrocorticography (ECoG) was developed. ECoG was applied to the detection of eptileptogenic zones for surgical resection as part of the groundbreaking Montreal procedure in the 1950s. 
Normal versus Abnormal: General Considerations 
One of the factors that may have limited the perception of EEG as a useful assessment tool in psychiatry is the simplistic attempt to conceptualize EEG findings as a normal-versus-abnormal dichotomy. Psychiatric practitioners commonly ask if their patient’s EEG is abnormal and seem content with an affirmative or negative answer. The expectation was that if the EEG was abnormal then this meant that the patient belonged to “neurology” and if normal that would confirm the psychiatric status of the patient. Furthermore, much of the published research literature reports the percentage of abnormal EEG findings in a given study population without stating the exact nature of the abnormalities. In actuality, the simple normal–abnormal dichotomy is inconsistent with the dynamic nature of EEG, particularly when interpreted by conventional visual inspection without use of more objective means of quantification that could equate EEG to more common, and reliably discernable, measures of physiological function used in medicine (e.g., blood pressure). Rather than being considered as a dichotomy, the range of EEG findings exists on a broad continuum anchored on one end by unequivocally normal EEGs and extending in the other direction to features of possible and, eventually, more definite clinical significance. Some EEG patterns that are correctly classified as abnormal are on the low end of the continuum of clinical expressivity and may not always contribute strongly to diagnostic decisions. The psychiatrist receiving a report of a minor finding of limited clinical relevance may understandably begin to question the value of EEG when no current or past history of organic signs are detected. The bottom line is that one should not ask simply if an EEG is abnormal, as if it were one side of a dichotomy, but instead should ask what specific features were present and what, if any, known clinical correlates may be associated with that feature. Even when questions remain about the clinical significance of 

========694========

an abnormal feature, this finding should not simply be disregarded and, at least, could indicate a need for follow-up EEG, additional brain imaging, neuropsychological assessment, review of medications or illicit drugs used, or other laboratory measures of cardiac and metabolic function. 
In addition to the confusion caused by the unwise reliance on the normal–abnormal dichotomy, literature reports stating that 10 to 20 percent of the normal population have abnormal EEG findings could lend uncertainty regarding the value of the EEG in psychiatric practices. Because such statements are almost never properly clarified, they tend to be terribly misleading. Clearly, there can be an understandable reluctance to follow up an abnormal EEG report if one has read in a presumably authoritative source that 20 percent of the normal population have abnormal EEG findings, decreasing the impression of their diagnostic specificity and, logically, clinical utility. More importantly, there also may be an equally understandable reluctance to refer a patient for EEG study for the same reason. To place the issue in proper perspective, the reports of substantial percentages of abnormal EEGs within the normal population are heavily skewed by the inclusion of minor findings that often have low levels of clinical or diagnostic relevance. A comprehensive review of the literature on EEG findings in normal control populations by Nash Boutros and colleagues highlights the fact that most control studies have been seriously compromised by failure to screen subjects for a variety of medical and psychiatric variables that can impact EEG results. This group had previously reanalyzed data from numerous published EEG control population studies. When borderline EEG findings were removed from the data, the incidence of EEG abnormality dropped to 3.2 percent of 6,182 healthy adults and 3.5 percent of 1,450 healthy children, with the prevalence of accepted paroxysmal EEG abnormalities reduced to only 1.14 percent of a sample of 11,560 mixed-age healthy subjects. 
Variants of Normal EEG 
Sleep Patterns. The EEG patterns that characterize drowsy and sleep states are different from the patterns seen during wake. A detailed accounting of the nuances of sleep EEG is beyond the scope of this chapter. Briefly, the rhythmic posterior alpha activity of the closed-eye waking state subsides during progressive drowsiness and is replaced by irregular low- voltage theta activity and sporadic vertex sharp waves, which indicate entry into stage 1 sleep. The progression into stage 2 sleep is marked by the appearance of 12- to 14-Hz sleep spindles (also called sigma waves) and k complexes. These patterns eventually give way to high-voltage (>75 μV) delta waves, which indicates stage 3 deep sleep. Lastly, REM sleep is characterized by low-voltage, mixed frequencies that resembles waking EEG. Some individuals may also exhibit low-amplitude sawtooth waves in REM sleep. 

========695========

Changes with Age. The appearance of the EEG changes dramatically from birth to advanced age. From a preponderance of irregular medium- to high-voltage delta activity in the tracing of the infant, EEG activity gradually increases in frequency and becomes more rhythmic with increasing age. Rhythmic activity in the upper theta–lower alpha range (7 to 8 Hz) can be seen in posterior areas by early childhood, and, by the time mid-adolescence is reached, the EEG essentially has the appearance of an adult tracing. The interpretation of EEGs obtained from children demands a solid grounding in the age-related changes during this period and is best performed by one specializing in pediatric EEG. For sake of the current chapter, it is sufficient to raise awareness that developmental period (among other factors to be discussed) must be considered in making absolute determinations regarding whether or not the presence of a given feature (e.g., presence of waking delta wave activity) is clinically significant. This topic of age-related change in EEG and trajectories of pathology receive detailed treatment in the text Developmental Psychophysiology, edited by Louis Schmidt and Sidney Segalowitz. 
Controversial Sharp Waves or Spike Patterns 
Early in the emergence of clinical EEG, a considerable amount of heated controversy developed around the clinical significance of certain sharp wave or spike patterns that were easily identified in the EEG tracing. These so-called controversial patterns deserve a specific mention here, because they have been observed consistently in numerous studies to be more prevalent in psychiatric populations than healthy or general medical patient populations. Despite the increased prevalence in psychiatric patients, defining the clinical and neurobiological correlates of these patterns has proved to be an elusive goal. The task is made difficult because none of these patterns is specific for a diagnostic category, and none predictably correlates with seizure disorders. Because the physiological or pathological correlates of these patterns have not been well studied using currently available methodologies and assessment techniques, the assertion that they are irrelevant to neuropsychiatric conditions is not fully supportable. At a minimum, the appearance of such patterns may give support to the possible organic nature of presenting symptoms. 
The number of accepted and still controversial EEG abnormalities is quite large and well beyond the scope of this chapter. For the purpose of illustration only, four classic abnormal EEG patterns are described in this section (Figs. 1.15–24 to 1.15–27). 
The reader should note that each of these four patterns has two different labels. One label usually is used by those who ascribe clinical significance to the pattern (i.e., small sharp spikes [SSSs]), and the other is used by those who consider these patterns to be normal variants (i.e., 

========696========

benign epileptiform transients of sleep [BETS]). Labels given in parentheses in the following section are the ones used by those who reject the potential clinical significance of the patterns. 
FIGURE 1.15–24.Diffusethree-per-second,spike-and-wavedischargesofthepetitmal type with a multiple spike component. The patient is a female 16 years of age with a previous history of petit mal seizures and rare grand mal attacks. At a previous psychiatric facility, the diagnosis was changed to “hysterical seizures” following a psychological evaluation. 
Fourteen- and Six-per-Second Positive Spikes (Ctenoids). Since its description by Fred and Erna Gibbs 50 years ago, the fourteen- and six-per- second positive spike pattern (hereafter called PS) has become the most frequently encountered of the controversial waveforms and the one with the most extensive literature (Fig. 1.15–28). 

========697========

FIGURE 1.15–25.Focalslow(delta),rightprefrontalspreadingwithreducedvoltageto right anterior and mid-temporal and right central regions. During the sleep recording (not shown), sleep spindles were absent in the right hemisphere. The patient is a female 49 years of age with no prior psychiatric history, recent emergence (over 6 months) of depression, mild episodic confusion, symptoms of hyperthyroidism, and pathological crying. Glioblastoma was found at surgery. 
FIGURE 1.15–26. Focal negative spike and spike–wave discharges in the right anterior temporal cortex and often spreading with reduced voltage throughout the right hemisphere. The patient is an adult male with complex partial seizures (psychomotor) and a psychiatric outpatient with infrequent periods of sudden unresponsiveness during which time he would make grunting and guttural sounds and speak with incoherent words and syllables with amnesia for these events. (His girlfriend, who was involved in New Age phenomena, was convinced that he was communicating with spirits during these unresponsive spells and did not want him to be medicated.) 
They are typically observed during sleep, and are described as bursts of arch- or comb-shaped waves at 14 and/or 6 Hz over posterior temporal areas when a contralateral ear reference is utilized. Indeed, the term “ctenoid” was coined by Lombroso and others to describe their comb-like 

========698========

shape. They are most often seen in states of drowsiness or in light non- REM sleep. The pattern is highly age-dependent, which starts after around the age of 4, and then declines as one enters adulthood. While originally thought to represent an indication of an underlying pathology (e.g., epilepsy, brain lesions), PSs have been shown to be quite common in healthy individuals, and are now only regarded as abnormal if they are pronounced or occur at an extremely high rate. 
Rhythmic Mid-Temporal Discharges (Psychomotor Variant). Rhythmic mid-temporal discharges (RMTDs) are long runs of activity in the 5 to 6.5 Hz range with a typical maximum over mid-temporal regions (Fig. 1.15– 29). They most commonly during drowsiness or light sleep. This pattern is rare, and is observed in less than 0.1 to 0.12 percent of the population. Earlier studies reported an increased incidence of seizures in patients with RMTD, but the association of this pattern with ictal phenomena remains controversial. Although there have been several efforts to link this EEG dysrhythmia with behavioral symptoms, such as temper dysregulation, personality disorder, or autonomic phenomena, other studies have not been able to demonstrate such associations. There have been rare documented cases of RMTD status epilepticus associated with prolonged periods of confusion. 
Small Sharp Spikes (Benign Epileptiform Transients of Sleep). The SSS pattern consists of rather low-voltage sharp negative or biphasic spikes that are best seen over the frontal–temporal cortex, sometimes alternating between the left and the right hemispheres (Fig. 1.15–30). It is very inconspicuous, and often overlooked. It is rarely seen in children, and tends to peak in those in the 30 to 60 age range (Chang et al., 2011). It is most often seen in drowsiness or in light non-REM sleep. They also have been associated with the presence of neurovegetative symptoms (i.e., headache, dizziness, and episodic abdominal pain). Furthermore, the likelihood of a patient experiencing epileptic seizures is higher in association with this pattern as compared to those of the other three controversial patterns. For example, the incidence of seizures in patients with SSS has ranged as high as 53 percent and even 67.4 percent, thus stressing the moderate degree of epileptogenicity of this pattern. 

========699========

FIGURE 1.15–27. Diffuse spike-and-wave discharges during the sleep recording. The waking electroencephalography was within normal limits. The patient is a female 15 years of age who was admitted to an inpatient adolescent unit with complaints of serious temper dyscontrol and episodic dizzy spells. 

========700========

FIGURE 1.15–28. Fourteen- and six-per-second positive spikes, independent left and right mid-temporal posterior–temporal–occipital areas. A: Fourteen-per-second variety; female patient, 13 years of age. B: Six-per-second variety; male patient, 24 years of age. An electroencephalograph may contain either variety alone or both combined. 
FIGURE 1.15–29. Rhythmic mid-temporal discharges (psychomotor variant) during drowsy recording. Left mid-temporal focus. The patient is a male 20 years of age with episodic temper dyscontrol, frequent intense homicidal urges, paresthesias, headaches, abdominal pain, and suicide plans (as a way of avoiding acting on strong homicidal impulses). Patient responded well to phenytoin (Dilantin) therapy. 

========701========

FIGURE 1.15–30. Small sharp spikes (underlined), right frontotemporal during stage II sleep. The patient is a female 24 years of age with a history negative for head trauma, encephalitis, or seizures. The psychiatric diagnosis was major depression. Patient also complained of headaches and infrequent parethesias. 
Six-per-Second Spike and Wave (Phantom Waves). Finally, the six-per- second spike-and-wave pattern (also called spike–wave phantom) is often difficult to recognize, because the discharges tend to be low in amplitude (Fig. 1.15–31). It is usually observed in adulthood, but can also be seen in children or adolescents. It occurs while awake, during drowsiness, or during light non-REM sleep. This pattern is now considered a normal variant, with uncertain clinical relevance. 
Paradigms for Eliciting Pathophysiological Features 
Over the years, electroencephalographers have recognized that certain activating procedures tend to increase the probability that abnormal discharges, particularly spike or spike–wave seizure discharges, will occur. Some activating techniques remain standard in many laboratories, others are used only rarely for specific purposes, and still others introduced in the past largely have been abandoned because they were not easy to use or involved risk. It has long been recognized that seizure manifestations or aberrant behaviors with a pathophysiological basis involving seizures can be triggered by specific stimuli. In this regard, cases of audiogenic, musicogenic, photogenic, and reading epilepsy readily come to mind, even 

========702========

though such cases are rare, and most practitioners have never encountered them. Seizure phenomena related to other sensory system input (e.g., somatosensory and gustatory) are even more rare. Sometimes, it may be possible for laboratory personnel to duplicate or approximate sensory triggers in various modalities to determine if they activate EEG seizure discharges combined with overt symptoms. Some of the more conventional activating techniques are described below. 
Photic Stimulation. In the earliest days of EEG, it was known that the frequency of normal EEG activity recorded from posterior scalp regions could be made (within narrow limits) to follow the frequency of a flickering light that was flashed slightly faster or slower than the intrinsic brain wave frequencies, a phenomenon that came to be referred to as photic-driving. An illustration of this phenomenon is presented in Figure 1.15–32, depicting the instantiation of a steady-state response of approximately 9 Hz over visual cortex following stimulation at a 9 Hz flicker rate. When it also became known that photic-driving would sometimes cause paroxysmal discharges to occur in the EEG, intermittent photic stimulation (IPS) emerged as a technique for eliciting EEG abnormalities referred to, under conditions of stimulation, as paroxysmal photosensitive responses (PRRs). Although there is some variation between laboratories, IPS generally involves placing an intense strobe light (at least 0.70 J) approximately 30- cm in from the nasion and flashing at frequencies that can range from 1 to 50 Hz, depending on how the procedure is carried out. It is recommended that a round stimulator be used to best ensure uniform stimulation of the entire retina. In addition to flashing light, flickering grid stimuli may be used to further assess pattern-specific photosensitive responses, which may be indicated in patients who tend to have seizures induced by television watching or video gaming. Some laboratories sample independent flash frequencies separately and randomly, without necessarily sampling all frequencies between 1 and 50 Hz, while others use a zoom technique in which the flashes start at a low frequency, such as 1 Hz, and are then gradually and continuously increased to higher frequencies. In some individuals, IPS produces facial and eye muscle jerks, called a photomyoclonic response (PMR). More than 40 years ago, Henri Gastaut observed that PMR occurs in 0.3 percent of normal subjects, 3 percent of epileptic patients, and 17 percent of patients with psychiatric disorders. The PMR also is enhanced in early stages of alcohol withdrawal in chronic alcoholics and after a sudden withdrawal from barbiturates and other sedatives. The clinical relevance of PMR in psychiatric patients is yet to be fully explored in systematic research. 

========703========

FIGURE 1.15–31. Six-per-second spike and wave during drowsy recording. Small electrocardiogram artifact present. The patient is a male 24 years of age diagnosed with schizophrenia. 
FIGURE 1.15–32. Photic driving using checkerboard pattern presented at 9-Hz flicker rate. Panel A: 10-second display of EEG at beginning of photic stimulation. Onset of visual checkerboard display indicated by “s” at bottom of display. Panel B: 1-second segment based on average EEG for 10-second period prior to stimulation recorded at electrode Oz. Panel C: Visual evoked potential (VEP) based on average of 10 seconds recorded during stimulation at electrode Oz. The VEP represents an oscillatory pattern of 9 cycles over 1 second segment. Panel D: VEP represented as time–frequency decomposition by wavelet transform of frequencies of 1 to 50 Hz at electrode Oz, with peak activity at approximately 9 Hz. Scalp plot (bottom right) indicates activity is generated primarily over occipital electrode sites. 

========704========

In terms of activating EEG abnormalities, one looks for a PRR that consists of bilaterally synchronous, usually diffuse, spike-and-wave discharges of various frequencies or diffuse, multiple spike–wave complexes. When the resting EEG is normal and a seizure disorder or behavior that is suspected to be a manifestation of a paroxysmal EEG dysrhythmia is suspected, IPS can be a valuable activation to use. Its primary limitations, especially as a routine procedure, are the “false positive” incidence of PRR in individuals with no history of seizure disorder or current symptoms suggestive of such, and similarly low sensitivity in cases of verified seizure disorder. The persistence of the spike–wave discharges after the cessation of the IPS may also be an indicative of a PRR. Moreover, a pathological process might be indicated by the spread of the spike–wave activity to leads outside the occipital region. 
Polysomnography—Sleep Study. Largely because of the pioneering studies and perseverance of Fred and Erna Gibbs, EEG recording during sleep, natural or sedated, now is widely accepted as an essential technique for eliciting a variety of paroxysmal discharges, when the wake tracing is normal, or for increasing the number of abnormal discharges to permit a more definitive interpretation to be made. A variety of focal and diffuse spike and spike–wave discharges, as well as several minor or controversial paroxysmal patterns, occur much more often during drowsiness and light sleep than during the wake recording, and some of them are seen almost exclusively during the sleep recording. Paroxysmal patterns differ substantially among themselves in the degree to which their appearance in the tracing is sleep-activation dependent (Fig. 1.15–33). Although most clinical EEGs should contain drowsy- and light-sleep tracings to be complete, stage 3 deep sleep with generalized high-voltage delta slowing have almost no activating property and is not clinically useful. 
Sleep Deprivation. It has been shown that the stress produced by 24 hours of sleep deprivation alone can lead to the activation of paroxysmal EEG discharges in some cases. This effect is presumably independent of the known activating properties of natural or sedated sleep itself. Sleep deprivation is without risk for the healthy patient but may be contraindicated for patients medically or physically compromised. The primary disadvantage is the tendency for sleep-deprived individuals to enter into deep sleep (stage 3) immediately at the start of the recording, thus reducing the chances of detecting spike activity. The optimal method is to ensure that the subject stays awake until the recording begins and remains so for the initial recording period, after which a gradual transition into drowsy sleep can be observed. 
Drug Activation and Suppression Tests. 
Psychiatrists evaluating a 

========705========

patient with an atypical behavioral reaction to a drug (e.g., an unusually severe response to a small amount of alcohol or other abused drug or some other highly idiosyncratic response) may consider a drug-activated EEG to determine if ingestion of the drug activates a seizure or other paroxysmal abnormality of clinical significance. In the past, drug activation using hypoglycemic agents (e.g., tolbutamide) and convulsants (e.g., pentylene tetrazol) was used to activate epileptiform discharges. However, this type of activation has been essentially eliminated from clinical work in recent years due to the high incidence of discharges produced by these drugs in healthy subjects and low value of positive findings in individuals with epilepsy. Today, drug modulation of EEG remains to be used as an investigative procedure for ascertaining drug effects on presumed neurophysiological mechanisms, both with relevance to enhancing functions in the case of drug development, and in modeling pathological conditions in healthy subjects using the pharmacological challenge design. While drug activation is no longer used in routine clinical practice, drug suppression paradigms are still regarded as useful for the identification of focal epileptiform activity. Seizure foci can be difficult to detect on EEG when in the case of generalized discharges and accompanying spread of activation across electrodes. In a drug suppression test, generalized discharges can be reduced by intravenous injection of diazepam or barbiturate methohexital (e.g., methohexital suppression test; MHXT). The rationale behind this approach is that by using drugs that block excitatory neurotransmission and/or enhance inhibitory transmission, much of the background EEG is suppressed while autonomous epileptogenic lesions, which are resistant to synaptic blockade, continue to fire. This approach can therefore improve localization of epileptiform lesions against background EEG and generalized activity that is dependent on synaptic input. 

========706========

FIGURE 1.15–33. Percent of various electroencephalography patterns detected only during drowsiness or sleep, or both. To be read as follows: Of all cases of multiple spike foci, 30 percent required a drowsy or sleep, or both, recording for their detection, and 70 percent were detected during a wake recording. RMTD, rhythmic mid-temporal discharge. 
Hyperventilation. Hyperventilation is one of the oldest, and still one of the most frequently used, activation procedures in clinical laboratories. While remaining reclined with the eyes closed, the patient is asked to overbreathe through their open mouth for 1 to 5 minutes (not useful beyond 5 minutes), emphasizing deep breathing rather than rapid breathing. The purpose is to empty the lungs to the extent of producing hypocarbia, and to reduce oxygen and glucose supply to the brain through cerebral vasoconstriction. The normal EEG response to hyperventilation (referred to in EEG parlance as a buildup) consists of an increase in generalized medium- to high-voltage synchronous slow waves in the delta range, which then quickly subside when overbreathing stops (within 1 to 2 minutes normally). Not everyone has a build-up response to hyperventilation, and children are far more likely to respond with diffuse EEG slowing than are adults. Indeed, this procedure is not effective in the elderly, who show minimal reactivity of the cerebral vasculature to hypocarbia, and is contraindicated those aged 65 and older. In terms of activating EEG abnormality, hyperventilation is especially effective in eliciting the classic diffuse three-per-second spike-and-wave complex of petit mal seizures when the pattern does not first appear in the standard waking EEG. Hyperventilation may, to a lesser degree, activate other synchronous diffuse spike–wave patterns and activation of focal seizure activity has been infrequently reported. An interesting observation is that significantly low blood glucose levels have been associated with large, 

========707========

synchronous delta wave hyperventilation buildups that may persist beyond 2 minutes after overbreathing is stopped. Accordingly, a large delta wave buildup in an adult may signal the existence of covert, unsuspected pathological hypoglycemia. If this suspicion should present itself during a recording, a good idea would be to give a sugar drink to the patient and then to repeat hyperventilation later. If the glucose ingestion reduces or abolishes the large hyperventilation buildup, then the suspicion of hypoglycemia is likely confirmed. In general, hyperventilation is one of the safest EEG activating procedures, and, for the majority of the population, will present no physical risk. However, it may pose a risk for patients with cardiopulmonary disease or risk factors for cerebral vascular pathophysiology, thus would also be contraindicated in these cases. 
Brief Synopsis of EEG Findings in Organic Pathophysiology 
The EEG has a high degree of sensitivity to a wide variety of medical conditions and events that impinge on CNS function. For this reason, EEGs sometimes have contributed to the detection of unsuspected organic pathophysiologies influencing a psychiatric presentation. The range of EEG findings in medical disease is enormous and far beyond the scope of this chapter, but this topic is covered in depth in the large edited volume by Ernst Niedermeyer and Lopes da Silva. Findings associated with some of the major organic conditions are discussed below. 
Seizure Disorder. The hallmark EEG finding for a seizure disorder is the generalized, hemispheric, or focal spike or spike–wave discharge, or both (Figs. 1.15–24, 1.15–26, and 1.15–27). However, this statement constitutes a large oversimplification, because many types of EEG abnormalities have been associated with seizures at one time or another, and some patients with a bona fide seizure disorder have been known to have normal interictal EEG tracings. Indeed, while epileptiform activity detected on EEG is a reasonably specific indicator of epilepsy, sensitivity can be quite low, ranging from 25 to 56 percent, with only about 50 percent of patients diagnosed with epilepsy evidencing interictal epileptiform discharge (IED) of their first EEG examination (of note, this rate can increase to 80 percent in sleep EEG). Furthermore, seizure disorders have many possible etiologies, whether genetically based or a consequence of head trauma, cerebrovascular pathophysiology, metabolic disorders, structural brain lesions, infectious or toxic encephalopathies, certain drug- abuse withdrawal states, or iatrogenic causes to name only a few. The diagnosis of seizure disorder based on EEG findings should consider family and personal medical history, while also keeping in mind that seizures can be idiopathic. 
The classification of seizure types is also broad, and the majority of specific seizure manifestations may be of little concern to the practicing 

========708========

psychiatrist. One of the exceptions may be absence (i.e., petit mal) seizures, during which the patient presents with grossly impaired consciousness marked by pronounced confusion, greatly slowed mental processes, and stuporous or somnolent behavior. Although these seizures tend to be brief, normally lasting only 15 to 30 seconds, absence episodes can reoccur as many as 100 times per day. The psychiatrist is most likely to encounter this clinical presentation in the emergency room, where it is often confused with other functional or organic syndromes or intoxicated states. If suspected, then the status can be confirmed quickly by an EEG demonstration of continuous, diffuse spike–wave activity. Typical absence seizures also may be of relevance to the child psychiatrist as this type of epilepsy has a peak incidence from childhood to early adolescence and, in some cases, may be mistaken for inattention or other functional behavioral reactions. Spike foci in the anterior temporal region, associated with CPSs (also known as psychomotor or temporal lobe seizures) should also be of interest to the psychiatrist due to the wide range of possible seizure manifestations, consisting of almost any combination of “automatic” motor movements, sensory disturbances, psychiatric symptoms, or autonomic signs. The symptom cluster almost always remains the same from one attack to another, and the “automatic” behavior during the ictal event may be quite unusual, with the patient undressing, picking at clothing and lip smacking, walking in circles and yelling, trying to climb on a table while making guttural noises, experiencing hallucinatory symptoms, or almost any other action. When continuous or closely spaced CPS attacks (complex partial status) lasting hours or longer than a day occur, they may mimic hysterical dissociative states. 
Spike activity of various kinds and locations is sometimes found in the EEGs of psychiatric patients with no obvious seizure manifestations. In such cases, one might consider possible relationships to episodic aberrant behavior (particularly explosive aggressiveness), if present, as well as a trial of an anticonvulsant medication. Sometimes, such spike discharges in the nonseizure psychiatric patient may indicate an elevated risk for iatrogenic seizures after treatment with neuroleptic medication (Fig. 1.15–34). 
Structural Lesions. Brain tumors are the leading cause of new-onset seizures in adults. EEG is rarely used for the diagnosis of structural and space-occupying lesions, which are typically assessed with CT or MRI. Nonetheless, it should be noted that 90 percent of cortical brain tumors can be detected and localized on the scalp with routine EEG. For a thorough treatment of the effect of tumors or other space-occupying lesions on the EEG, please see Hartman and Lesser (2011). 

========709========

FIGURE 1.15–34. Routine admission electroencephalography (EEG). Diffuse spike-and- wave with multiple spike components during drowsiness recording (the wake EEG was normal). The patient is a male, 16 years of age with no present or past history of seizures and no history of head trauma, encephalitis, or other plausible causes for the spiking. Patient later developed iatrogenic grand mal seizures during treatment with neuroleptics. 
Closed Head Injury. Generalized or focal slowing is the main characteristic of EEG following head trauma, appearing over the site of the trauma or over a contrecoup (e.g., the side opposite the side of impact) location. Attenuation of posterior alpha is another hallmark feature associated with head injury. The basic premise guiding the interpretation of these observations is that the frequency and power of scalp-recorded EEG is dependent on the numbers of activated neurons and the integrity of their connections. Therefore, in the case of injury, reductions in neurons and disruption of normal connectivity result in attenuation of signal power and a shift to slower frequency. The EEG change may be relatively transient with resolution over days or weeks, or it may persist for extended periods of time. Focal spiking may be taken as an early indication of a posttraumatic seizure disorder. Subdural hematomas after head injury may present with focal delta slowing or more widespread slowing, and, on occasion, amplitude asymmetry of waking EEG with the voltage decreased over the site of the hematoma. That said, conventional EEG is generally not regarded as clinically useful in cases of mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), particularly beyond the first several hours following injury and when loss of consciousness (LOC) with injury is 2 minutes or less. EEG findings may 

========710========

appear normal early in the postinjury period following mTBI despite the presence of postconcussive symptoms, such as headache, dizziness, fatigue, irritability, impaired memory and concentration, insomnia, and sound and light sensitivity. Clinically significant EEG changes in association with mTBI, if at all present, may not be recognized as deviant until compared with follow-up EEG taken later in the postinjury period. Of note, literature reviews suggest that as many as 20 percent of cases with noncomplicated mTBI recover from clinical symptoms within the first 24 hours, and as many as 85 percent within 1 week following injury. Similarly, abnormalities detectable by conventional clinical EEG tend to resolve within months of injury. 
While routine clinical EEG may not be regarded as a useful tool for routine screening of mTBI, at least not beyond detection of posttraumatic seizure activity, there is evidence that Q-EEG may hold some promise. Numerous studies by Robert Thatcher and colleagues, as well as others, have reported Q-EEG findings associated with the postconcussion syndromes following mild to moderate closed head trauma. Reported Q- EEG changes involve a combination of increased theta power, decreased alpha power, increased theta–alpha ratios, and increased coherence between frontal and temporal areas in the resting EEG. A number of studies have applied discriminative analysis to Q-EEG collected in mTBI versus control sample, yielding high classification accuracy, and have demonstrated the utility of Q-EEG in predicting functional disability. Q- EEG and related topographic analysis are likely to outperform routine clinical EEG in these cases because the quantification process aims to identify sharply focal or regional alterations in activity according to statistically significant deviations from normative parameters, which could remain below the threshold for accurate visual detection (Fig. 1.15–35). The use of Q-EEG in assessment of mTBI nevertheless remains a heavily debated topic, with supporting evidence criticized for the composition of study samples and other methodological choices. David Arciniegas has published a detailed review on this issue including many suggestions for further reading. 

========711========

FIGURE 1.15–35. Topographic quantitative electroencephalography map of theta absolute power (z score departures from normative database mean). The patient is a male, 24 years of age with a closed head injury. The focus of increased theta voltage is at the locus of an earlier head injury that occurred about approximately 2 years before the recording. This was an unexpected finding. After recording and quantification, the color bar scale was adjusted to maximize the bull’s-eye localization effect. Theta voltage was also elevated to a lesser extent over a wide, right frontal area and even spread somewhat across the midline. Theta relative power (not shown) was also elevated over the right frontal region, but mapping did not produce a sharp relative power focus at the locus of injury. Important note: A very sharply defined bull’s eye can also be produced by artifact from a faulty electrode, and it is imperative to monitor electrical impedance and check the integrity of the electrode in the event that deviant activity appears confined to only one lead with no spread to adjoining electrodes. 
Metabolic and Endocrine Disorders. EEG is not a tool that one would use in assessing endocrine or metabolic disorders. Yet the majority of these conditions alter the EEG, and unexpected abnormal findings during routine EEG screening have occasionally been the first positive laboratory results leading to the subsequent identification of mild endocrine or metabolic disturbance. Because metabolic and endocrine disorders, as well as certain vitamin deficiencies and toxic exposures, affect the brain in a global fashion, they tend to produce diffuse generalized slowing of wake 

========712========

frequencies, with the degree of abnormality correlated with the severity of the disorder. As would be expected, focal slowing is almost never seen, and paroxysmal spike activity is quite rare, although spike activity has been observed in cases of hypocalcemia, acute intermittent porphyria, and exposures to some toxic substances (e.g., lead, carbon monoxide). Early hepatic disease is commonly associated with generalized slowing in the theta range, which may increase in severity with elevated blood ammonia levels. If the disorder progresses to hepatic encephalopathy, a distinctive and diagnostically relevant EEG pattern called triphasic waves (or, more informally, liver waves) can emerge, characterized by frontally dominant or diffuse 1.5- to 3.0-per-second high-voltage slow waves initiated by blunt or rounded spike-like transients. For a thorough review of the effect of various metabolic disorders on EEG, the reader is directed to referenced chapter by Pang and colleagues. 
Psychiatry Overview 
Starting in approximately 1938, a flurry of continuing EEG investigations began to reveal an increase in the overall prevalence of minor abnormalities in almost all psychiatric populations as compared to healthy or nonpsychiatric individuals, which continue to be investigated to this day. On the other hand, two major factors led to the rapid disillusionment of the field of psychiatry with EEG. The first was the lack of specificity of EEG abnormalities to known psychiatric syndromes. The second factor, alluded to previously, was the continuing discovery of EEG abnormalities correlating with epilepsy, tumors, encephalopathies, stroke syndromes, and coma. With discoveries of significant EEG changes accompanying neurological problems on the rise and EEG abnormalities associated with psychiatric symptomatology remaining to be relatively obscure and noncontributory to the diagnostic process, the field of clinical EEG (and later clinical neurophysiology) became more firmly established as a subspecialty of neurology, with de-emphasis of EEG among psychiatrists. 
The recent surge of interest in the neurobiology of psychiatric disorders, the emergence of the clinical field of neuropsychiatry, and the unprecedented advances in computerized analyses of EEG and other neurophysiological signals have resulted in a strong rekindling of interest in electrophysiology among psychiatrists. In 1995, John Hughes undertook the mammoth task of compiling a comprehensive outline of the broad area of EEG and psychiatry with 181 significant references selected for citation from before 1950 until 1994. When such compilations are inspected, the findings reveal that more than one-half of the EEG–psychiatry references appear after 1980, and one-third were written within the 5 years preceding Hughes’ 1995 report. Continued inspection of the literature indicates that this trend has not abated. A PubMed search using the terms “EEG + Psychiatry” identified an additional 6,144 articles published in this field 

========713========

since 1995, including both clinical and basic science research. Furthermore, two scientific organizations have been established for the primary purpose of accelerating the translation of electrophysiological research findings to clinically utilizable laboratory tests. In 1991, the American Psychiatric Electrophysiology Association (APEA) was founded. In 1999, the APEA merged with the American Medical EEG Association (AMEEGA), and the 
EEG and Clinical Neuroscience (http://www.ecnsweb.com). 
Society 
(ECNS) 
was 
formed 
In spite of the enormous research potential recognized in psychiatry, electrophysiological methods are still of limited impact in clinical practice, where their primary applications are to aid in differential diagnostic purposes (i.e., the exclusion of “organic” brain pathology), and to the investigation of sleep disorders. There is no accepted indication of EEG methods for the diagnosis DSM-5 psychiatric disorders or for drug treatment choice and monitoring. This may seem surprising when considering that (1) robust results of quantitative Q-EEG abnormalities have been reported and independently confirmed for major psychiatric disorders, especially for schizophrenia; (2) evidence has been provided that abnormalities of event-related potentials and of eye movements are related to genetic risk factors, symptom dimensions, prognosis, and diagnostic subtypes of schizophrenia and depression; and (3) EEG and related 
methodologies 
already 
provide 
translational 
paradigms 
and 
have 
demonstrated promise in predicting the likelihood that novel therapies and compounds will exhibit clinical efficacy in preclinical development as well as in clinical trials. However, it should also be acknowledged that despite acceptance of psychiatric disorders as “brain disorders” there are currently no tests from any discipline of brain imaging or behavioral assessment that have been formally integrated into clinical diagnostic formulation. Perhaps this disconnect reflects the fact that it is not brain function, per se, but disordered behavior (e.g., reduction in normal routine behavior, elevation in abnormal behavior causing distress to self/others) that signifies the need for clinical attention and, thereby, serves as the basis for diagnosis and treatment decisions. In this respect it is understandable that even the strongest evidence linking an electrophysiological feature to a symptom or disorder may not necessarily indicate use of that feature as a diagnostic measure when clinical symptoms are acutely present. 
Where then could electrophysiology find a place in applied clinical 
psychiatry? One promising pathophysiological processes 
area 
is in the early detection of preclinical periods that could 
during 
eventuate to psychiatric illness. For example, the prodromal period of psychosis is now well recognized as a stage of disease progression during which at-risk individuals (e.g., presenting genetic liability, attenuated symptoms) begin to express functional impairment, which may correspond to a combination of factors affecting critical periods of brain maturation. 

========714========

Early detection is currently a topic of great interest to psychiatric research as well as to the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), who, under directorship Thomas Insel, coalesced 8 independent research laboratories in forming the North American Prodromal Longitudinal Study (NAPLS) consortium. Early psychosis prediction and prevention (i.e., EP3) was subsequently identified as an NIMH priority issue in 2013, with plans to focus funding efforts on this area for the following 5 years. These developments are consistent with aims to reduce disability of severe psychiatric illness through early detection and intervention, reducing long periods of untreated illness that may precede a first clinical encounter. EEG methodology has figured prominently in the conceptualization and data collection of NAPLS investigations, with paradigms demonstrated to be sensitive to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia used as predictors of conversion to formal psychotic disorder during the prodromal stage. EEG has provided a highly valuable assessment tool for this work, having advantages of being low-risk, noninvasive, and well-tolerated by this study population. Importantly, EEG has established sensitivity to normal neurodevelopmental processes that are hypothesized to be altered in the schizophrenia disease process. Finally, it should not be overlooked that EEG systems can be purchased at relatively low cost (~$60k), enabling equipment to be standardized across centers participating in multisite research. Innovations of the NAPLS study have included traveling subjects and additional calibration procedures to assess reliability of instrumentation and measures across sites, and has firmly established the feasibility of large-scale data collection efforts in psychiatry. 
Nonspecificity of Results 
Two particular problems plague and hinder research in the field of EEG abnormalities in psychiatric populations. First is the belief that EEG abnormalities can be found in up to 20 percent of otherwise healthy individuals. The second major problem is another pervasive belief that interictal epileptiform activities, in the absence of clinically diagnosable seizures, are incidental (or nonspecific) findings without clinical relevance. Well-designed studies addressing these two important issues are needed to allow further research in this field to be more meaningful. 
Moreover, there are only a limited number of ways in which brain electrical activity can respond to normal or pathological influences. Brain waves change simply by becoming faster or slower in frequency or lower or higher in voltage, or perhaps some combination of these two responses. Thus, very similar patterns of EEG abnormality can emerge from different etiological causes. For example, a neoplasm, subdural hematoma, brain abscess, cerebral vascular accident, or closed head injury, may result in similar, although not always identical, focal EEG slowing. Generalized slowing is a common abnormal finding for which the etiological causes 

========715========

include cortical atrophy, drug-induced encephalopathy, ECT, encephalitis, certain endocrine disorders (hypothyroidism and hypopituitarism), porphyria, head trauma, lead exposure, hypocalcemia, and Wernicke encephalopathy, to name but a few. The nonspecificity of results or the failure to specifically denote etiology is a genuine limitation, but one that is not as bleak as one may think. 
Concerns raised regarding the sensitivity and specificity of EEG abnormalities does pertain primarily to conventional clinical EEG, which realistically only permits examination of the few dimensions of data that can be ascertained by visual inspection. The same concerns, though still appropriate, may in time be alleviated to an acceptable level given advances in the field of Q-EEG. Q-EEG profiles, as well as deviations on evoked responses, have produced high sensitivity and specificity in classification analysis comparing subjects with psychiatric disorders to healthy comparison and other diagnostic groups. Although, by and large, Q-EEG remains a research tool, its promise for aiding the differential diagnostic process and predicting treatment response to pharmacological agents is becoming clearly evident. 
Applied EEG in Psychiatry 
As stated previously, the role of EEG in applied clinical psychiatry remains fairly limited to differential diagnosis of organic etiologies. In this regard, the EEG can be most useful when the presenting symptoms, age of first symptom onset, or response to treatment is atypical, suggesting that a more structural cerebral pathology may be contributing to the syndrome being evaluated. In such cases, the presence of paroxysmal EEG activity or focal or diffuse slowing should be ruled out (see the example in Fig. 1.15–36). If paroxysmal activity is identified, then it is important to be clear that such an EEG finding is not sufficient grounds to diagnose epilepsy, unless, retrospectively, the symptoms can be seen as being of an epileptic nature. The presence of a paroxysmal EEG abnormality in a patient with an atypical presentation, particularly in the absence of a family history of the diagnosis that is being considered, should lead the clinician to be wary of and less confident in the diagnosis. It may be a good practice at the current state of knowledge to take advantage of the not otherwise specified category. Whether anticonvulsants are indicated in these situations remains a question open to clinical judgement. Early studies in this area suggested that anticonvulsants can sometimes block EEG epileptiform discharges and also can lead to dramatic clinical improvement in individuals exhibiting aggressive behavior. Furthermore, carbamazepine (Tegretol) was thought to be clinically useful in individuals with schizophrenia who exhibited temporal lobe EEG findings and aggressive tendencies without history of seizure disorder. Based on current practice, it would seem as though prescribers are comfortable using adjunctive 

========716========

anticonvulsant therapy for many indications, irrespective of EEG findings, as would be suggested by common prescription of this medication class in anxiety disorders, dementia, schizophrenia, depression and bipolar disorders, and in cases of drug and alcohol withdrawal syndromes. Prescription in these cases, perhaps with exception of drug withdrawal, is not based on question of seizures but, rather, on the efficacy of anticonvulsants for treating psychiatric symptoms including aggression, mood swings, mania, and panic symptoms. 
FIGURE 1.15–36.The patient is a single female, 40 years of age admitted to psychiatry for “functional” anorexia nervosa. This was the first episode with no prior psychiatric history. Patient would frequently vomit after meals and insisted that it was not self- induced. Medical examination before admission was negative. Routine admission electroencephalography: Focal slowing (delta), left frontal-temporal with reduced voltage spread through left hemisphere. Left frontal–temporal deep neoplasm found. Neurosurgical intervention was unsuccessful. 
Similar comments can be made regarding the presence of a focal slow wave abnormality in the EEG. A minimal focal slow wave abnormality is unlikely to reflect a serious space-occupying lesion in a patient with a normal neurological examination. However, if no logical explanation for the minor focal slowing is apparent (e.g., old head injury) and the finding did not appear on earlier EEGs, then a repeat EEG may be valuable to determine whether the finding is static or progressive. Clinicians should use their clinical judgment regarding when imaging (and what imaging) should be performed. If a space-occupying lesion is suspected, then a CT scan is usually sufficient. An MRI is more likely to yield abnormalities if the 

========717========

status of the lesion is less acute (e.g., old head injury). The presence of a focal slow abnormality, similar to the presence of paroxysmal activity, should cause the clinician to be wary of the diagnosis. Consideration also should be given to obtaining a neuropsychological evaluation to assess whether the focal cerebral abnormality identified by the EEG has any clinically correlating deficits. 
The situation is different when an EEG is obtained in the course of managing an unstable or nonresponsive patient. The most important data to be gained from an EEG performed on an acutely agitated patient are the presence of diffuse slowing (indicating a delirious encephalopathic state) or ongoing epileptic activity NCSE. In both conditions, the EEG abnormality is fairly obvious and can be detected in a short period of time by temporarily retraining the patient, if needed, and using an electrode cap to minimize setup time. The EEG can be extremely useful in ruling out delirium secondary to medication toxicity, and, in this respect, it should be noted that diffuse EEG slowing (suggestive of a diffuse encephalopathic process) may be seen despite serum plasma levels within the therapeutic range. 
When dealing with geriatric populations, sensitivity to organic pathology should be particularly heightened. In addition to the evaluation for dementia and delirium, EEG could be invaluable when there is a suspicion of seizures, and, in this respect, it is noted that elderly patients may account for as many as one-fourth of the cases of new onset epilepsy. One also must keep in mind that a normal EEG in a patient diagnosed with dementias, once past a mild stage, should raise the suspicion that a depressive disorder, or other reversible cause, may be contributing to the clinical picture. 
EEG Findings in Psychiatric Disorders 
In addition to the general considerations regarding the interface between EEG and psychiatry, a number of psychiatric disorders deserve specific mention. Findings deemed promising for clinical applications will be briefly reviewed. 
Schizophrenia. EEG abnormalities have been extensively examined in schizophrenia patients. A literature review conducted by Boutros and colleagues in 2008 examined whether findings on EEG spectral abnormalities warranted additional effort toward developing them into a clinical diagnostic test for schizophrenia. Fifty-three papers were classified based on a four-step approach for evaluating the clinical usefulness of a diagnostic test (Table 1.15–1), and 15 of the papers were included in a meta- analysis. The review and meta-analysis revealed that most of the abnormalities were replicable across studies, with the most consistent results related to the prominence of resting low-frequency schizophrenia 

========718========

patients regardless of medication status. 
Table 1.15–1. 
Proposed Four-Step Approach 
Step Design Purposes 
1 Target group vs. healthy 1. Demonstration of significant deviance in 
controls. the target group. 
2. Demonstration of test–retest reliability of 
finding. 
2 
Target group vs. healthy 
and appropriate 
patient control 
groups. 
Target vs. proper control 
groups (may include 
within target group 
subpopulations). Same as in Step 3 but 
across centers, ideally 
in a multicenter 
design. 
Demonstration of significant differential 
prevalence of abnormality between 
illnesses that frequently need to be 
differentiated from one another. Definition of test-performance 
characteristics. 
Desired Outcomes Provide evidence of a 
consistent 
biological 
abnormality in the 
target group. Demonstration of 
potential clinical 
utility. 
3 
Defining clinical utility. 
4 
Demonstration and standardization of 
clinical application. 
Setting up standards 
for clinical 
application. 
Suggested guidelines for evaluating the clinical usefulness of a diagnostic test, as published by Boutros and colleagues (2007) and applied by Boutros and colleagues (2008). 
A recent study published by the Bipolar and Schizophrenia Network on Intermediate Phenotypes (BSNIP) multicenter consortium examined the polygenic architecture of resting state EEG frequency activity in 105 schizophrenia, 145 psychotic bipolar disorder, and 56 healthy individuals using 1 million single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) derived from DNA. Multivariate data clustering and component extraction methods identified five frequency and nine SNP components, with theta and delta activity found to correlate with gene components involved in brain development, neurogenesis and synaptogenesis. Increased anterior delta and posterior theta abnormality was present in both schizophrenia and bipolar samples, while theta differed between the two disorders. Theta abnormalities were also mediated by unique gene clusters involved in glutamic acid pathway and synaptic cell adhesion processes. These results replicated prior findings pertaining to excess resting slow wave activity in schizophrenia, and further differentiated the component structure of this abnormality from psychotic bipolar disorder patients, thus elevating specificity of this feature to a diagnostic differential that is difficult to make using conventional clinical assessment. These findings further point to plausible genetic networks, consisting of genes previously implicated in schizophrenia as well as novel mechanisms, that could underlie abnormal features observed in resting EEG. 

========719========

Catatonia. Although the routine EEGs of catatonic patients with known functional etiology tend to be normal, catatonia could be a symptom of a number of serious medical conditions, including epilepsy and encephalopathy secondary to a variety of general medical conditions. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome has presented, at times, as catatonia, and, in such cases, the EEG is likely to show a picture of diffuse slowing indicative of an encephalopathic process. Although a well-known patient whose usual presentation includes catatonic symptoms may not need an EEG, it is advisable to obtain an EEG on every new patient who presents with catatonic symptoms. 
Panic Disorder. Panic attack symptoms carry a significant resemblance to symptoms induced by temporolimbic epileptic activity, particularly those originating from the sylvian fissure. Fear, derealization, tachycardia, diaphoresis, and abdominal discomfort are characteristic symptoms of simple partial seizures with psychiatric and autonomic symptomatology. Studies comparing symptomatology of patients with panic disorder to patients with CPSs have reported much similarity, suggesting that there may be a common neurophysiological substrate linking the disorders. Notable conclusions of this literature are that individuals suffering from panic disorder show a higher rate of unspecific EEG abnormalities that include a unique increase in beta power, thought to align with the common clinical observation of hyperarousal in these patients. Although some evidence may suggest that IEDs occur at higher than normative baseline rates in panic disorder, relationships between panic symptoms and seizure activity remains far from clear, with EEG findings ranging from paroxysmal epileptiform discharges to asymmetrical increases in slow wave activity and focal slow wave abnormalities (reportedly observed in up to 25 percent of patients with panic disorder). Along these lines, it has been suggested that use of anticonvulsant drugs, including VPA (Depakene), be considered in cases of panic disorder if conventional anxiolytic treatment is inefficacious. 
On the other side of the coin, panic attacks also have been demonstrated to occur more frequently in epileptic patients. In some cases, these attacks could lead to overmedication for seizures if their nature is not precisely defined. Again, EEG monitoring during multiple attacks is indispensable in rendering such an evaluation. Other reports have concluded that the most common psychiatric disorder that must be differentiated from temporal lobe epilepsy is panic disorder. Epileptic seizures are commonly briefer and more stereotyped than panic attacks. Additionally, aphasia and dysmnesia often accompany seizure activity. 
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. EEG studies in patients with OCD reported a widespread increase of slow waves, with additional report of epileptiform activities over the left temporal lobe. The frequency of these 

========720========

abnormalities varies among studies. 
Q-EEG studies have more often involved the anterior regions of the scalp, supporting the hypothesis of a frontal dysfunction in the pathogenesis of OCD. The cingulate gyrus, in particular, has been implicated as a locus of dysfunction by Q-EEG topographic brain mapping. Data concerning the involvement of a specific frequency band have been heterogeneous, probably due to differences in methodologies, small study sample sizes, and a broadly heterogeneous patient population in terms of the presentation of OCD symptoms. Although not given the coverage that might be deserving of the topic in the current chapter, EEG biofeedback or, more precisely, neurofeedback, has gained interest as a nonpharmacologic treatment option for individuals suffering OCD. Basically, neurofeedback involves a graphic representation of ongoing EEG to the patient, who may learn to implicitly modulate activity upward or downward toward what would be regarded as normalization from a pathophysiological baseline. Again, although varied in terms of the specific EEG frequencies and locations involved in OCD therapy, neurofeedback has been approved by the FDA as a treatment for stress management and, like stress, may benefit from improved self-regulation that can be achieved as a common therapeutic mechanism of neurofeedback. 
Mood Disorders. Depression may result from a variety of brain and other somatic diseases (e.g., tumors, dementia, and vascular accidents) that EEG can help to identify. With this exception, diagnosis of mood disorders is typically not informed by EEG. Nevertheless, research findings of EEG abnormality in depression, starting with the first publication by Fredrick Lemere in 1936, have provided many intuitive interpretations relating the clinical features of depression to brain mechanisms. Of note, Lemere’s first paper, in which he proposed “…The ability to produce ‘good’ alpha waves seems to be a neurophysiological characteristic which is related in some way to the affective capacity of the individual…,” followed Hans Berger’s original report on the human EEG by only a few years and, indeed, referred to 10 Hz alpha waves as “Berger rhythms.” Observations involving abnormality in the alpha frequency have continued to be the major story pertaining to EEG research and conceptualization of depression up through current times. Since the early 1980s, work credited to Richard Davidson and colleagues has highlighted frontal alpha asymmetry and the associated Approach-Withdrawal model (aka the dispositional model) as an explanatory synthesis of the neural basis of depression. Briefly, an asymmetry of frontal alpha involving hyperactivation of the right hemisphere relative to the left has been interpreted as the interplay of approach (facilitating appetitive behaviors in association with positive affect) and withdrawal (facilitating avoidance of aversive stimuli in association with negative affect), with reduction in left-sided alpha thought 

========721========

to reflect deficient approach system activation in depression. The model further stipulates that relatively higher right-sided withdrawal system activation contributes to anxiety and other forms of psychopathology. EEG research has continued to support this seminal finding of frontal alpha asymmetry and, to some extent, this formulation of depression, with studies by other groups suggesting that alpha asymmetry more likely reflected a state rather than trait feature in major depression. New models based on alpha asymmetry have since been proposed, including the capability model, which postulates that brain activity elicited under emotional challenge will be a stronger indicator of psychopathology than when measured at rest, and therefore entails testing with emotionally provocative stimuli. 
Few large scale EEG studies have been carried out in acute, drug-free subjects during a manic episode, probably due in part to the difficulty of obtaining such data. However, Joyce Small and colleagues published several papers in the late 1990s on a sample of approximately 200 patients admitted to the Larue D. Carter Memorial Hospital of Indianapolis in acute manic states, many of whom received follow-up EEGs when medicated, after medication-washout, and when rehospitalized during subsequent episodes. Q-EEG was also performed in a subsample of about 40 patients who were cooperative enough to test. Remarkably, the majority of EEG data collected was interpreted to be normal. A slight increase in abnormal features (16 percent of sample) was associated with positive family history of mood disorder and spike–wave activity was observed in 17 percent of the sample. Q-EEG differentiated patients on the basis of prescribed pharmacotherapy, with higher theta activity at baseline predicative of poorer response to psychotropic drugs. Abnormal hemispheric laterality was detected in a smaller portion of patients (9 percent), which implicated left hemisphere involvement. 
Recent evidence suggests the usefulness of baseline Q-EEG measurements in the prediction of positive as well as negative outcomes of treatments with antidepressant drugs. Andrew Leuchter and his team introduced cordance, a Q-EEG measure combining relative and absolute power, to investigate correlates of response to fluoxetine in unipolar depression, with a double-blind, placebo-controlled paradigm. Significantly more depressed subjects with high cordance in the theta band responded to fluoxetine in comparison to those with low cordance. The results were interpreted as suggesting that only depressed subjects with low baseline dysregulation respond to treatment. More recent studies conducted by Leucther’s group have also found change in prefrontal cordance measures to be predictive of a positive response (e.g., reductions in Hamilton Depression Scale scores) to placebo conditions, however, the direction of change in concordance indicating improvement has not been entirely consistent across studies. 

========722========

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. ADHD is a prevalent disorder among children and adolescents, as well as adults. The prevalence of abnormalities in the conventional EEG is higher in ADHD than that in age- and gender-matched healthy control subjects, with approximately one- third of ADHD children having abnormal routine EEGs and a significant proportion exhibiting spike or spike–wave discharges. Some studies even report abnormal EEG incidence to be as high as 60 percent for this disorder. In addition, an association between child and adolescent ADHD and the controversial 14- and 6-per-second positive spike pattern also has been reported. Writing in a 2001 issue of Pediatric Neurology, Sarah Hemmer and colleagues reported that 15.4 percent of 234 ADHD children had frank epileptiform EEG abnormalities (controversial waveforms were not included) and went on to offer the extremely important observation that epileptiform EEG findings might increase the risk for seizures with methylphenidate (Ritalin) therapy. In their data, there was a seizure incidence of 0.6 percent in patients with pre-methylphenidate normal EEGs, as contrasted with a 6 percent seizure incidence in patients with pre- methylphenidate epileptiform EEGs (an example of premedication seizure discharges in a patient developing iatrogenic grand mal seizures after neuroleptic treatment was given earlier in Figure 1.15–34. 
Q-EEG has identified increased theta activity, particularly in the frontal lobe regions, as a consistent finding in ADHD. Even when learning disability is removed as a confounding variable, increased theta remains as one of the most prevalent EEG findings in this disorder, replicated by a number of groups from different parts of the world. In addition to being a consistent finding, the theta increase seen in ADHD is resistant to age effects, whereas abnormalities of beta EEG frequency tend to decrease with age. It also should be noted that early work suggests that increased theta abnormality frontally may be a strong predictor of response to methylphenidate and other psychostimulants and that favorable clinical responses may be associated with a normalization of the EEG abnormality. Because decreased beta activity has sometimes been reported in ADHD, some investigators have tried to examine the theta-to-beta ratio as a stronger measure of ADHD-related EEG abnormality with a higher detection power. There are, however, additional Q-EEG reports of an increase (instead of decrease) in beta activity in similar patients, raising questions concerning whether or not different subtypes of ADHD differentially affect beta activity. Finally, discriminant function analyses of Q-EEG data have been shown to be capable of significantly discriminating between healthy, attention deficit disorder and ADHD, and learning disability subpopulations. 
Dementia and Delirium. Because patients with advanced dementia rarely have normal EEG, a normal test result can play an important role in 

========723========

diagnosing cases of pseudodementia (symptoms of dementia secondary to depression or psychosis). When dementia and depression coexist, it becomes important to have some idea about the relative contribution of each disorder to the overall clinical presentation. In a comparison of the EEGs of patients with depression, dementia, pseudodementia, and dementia plus depression with the EEGs of normal age-matched controls, the degree of EEG abnormality shows a significant inverse association with clinical response to antidepressants. 
The routine EEG is also useful in following the progression of Alzheimer disease, and may be useful in differentiating the Alzheimer etiology from that of frontotemporal dementia (FTD), which has been associated with either normal routine EEGs or mild frontal slowing despite progressive behavioral deterioration. Relatively normal EEG in FTD should therefore not be taken as an indication that behavioral features in these patients result from primary psychiatric causes. 
A number of recent publications strongly support the utility of Q-EEG as diagnostic and prognostic tests for early Alzheimer disease. Collaborative work between centers in Stockholm and New York City, under the leadership of Christoph Lehmann, provided diagnostic efficiency statistics for EEG-based classification of mild Alzheimer disease from healthy controls of 85 percent sensitivity and 78 percent specificity. On the basis of available literature, EEG measures are likely to rapidly emerge as a cornerstone of diagnostic workup for suspected Alzheimer disease. 
The differential diagnosis of acutely disturbed and disorganized patients often includes delirium. In acutely agitated delirious patients, the EEG is often helpful in indicating whether the alteration in consciousness is due to (1) a diffuse encephalopathic process, (2) a focal brain lesion, or (3) continued epileptic activity without motor manifestations. Most often, patients with delirium have a toxic metabolic encephalopathy. In general, with the progression of the encephalopathy, there is diffuse slowing of the background rhythms from alpha (8 to 12 Hz) to theta (4.0 to 7.5 Hz) activity. Delta activity (<3.5 Hz) usually does not become prominent until the patient approaches nonresponsiveness. The major exception to this rule is seen during withdrawal from alcohol and during delirium tremens. Instead of diffuse slowing, as described previously, excessive fast activity dominates the EEG in patients with alcohol withdrawal delirium. Patients in alcohol withdrawal who are not delirious could have a normal EEG. Low- voltage fast activity also can be induced by benzodiazepines, and this should be borne in mind when interpreting the EEG. The EEG thus can be helpful in differentiating between alcohol withdrawal delirium tremens and encephalopathies from other causes, including iatrogenic encephalopathy. The seminal work of George L. Engel and John Romano described the clinical features and the role of the EEG in detecting delirium. The typical changes are slowing or even loss of the posterior dominant rhythm, slow- 

========724========

wave increase, reduced reactivity to eye opening, and intermittent, especially frontally located, rhythmic delta activity. These neurophysiological changes relate to the dopaminergic–cholinergic dysbalance as the final common pathway of delirium with a lack of cholinergic stimulation. In contrast to delirium cases revealing a cholinergic deficit as a common pathophysiological feature, alcohol or benzodiazepine abstinence delirium results in decreased EEG voltage and an increase of fast activities, while nonconvulsive seizure state may be indicated by rhythmic activity and typical epileptiform discharges. Serial EEG assessments are considered the gold standard of delirium diagnostics. 
Q-EEG is capable of detecting subtle changes and is especially useful for the evaluation of frail elderly with a high prevalence of dementia, accumulated organic brain disease, and age-related EEG changes. Using relative power measures alpha decrease and delta increase, as well as reduction in peak or mean frequency and diminished fast-to-slow-wave ratios, have been found to indicate delirium. In the presence of dementia, Q-EEG greatly improves delirium detection and monitoring, especially when supplemented with a simple activation procedure as demonstrated by Charles Thomas and colleagues. 
Autistic Spectrum Disorders. Several types of EEG abnormalities have been found in ASDs including epileptiform activity, background slowing, and abnormal EEG hemispheric asymmetry. Altered mu rhythms (transient, nonoccipital alpha rhythms that occur over motor cortex) have also been reported, which some have postulated to indicate altered “mirror neuron” function, referring to neurons that fire both when an individual performs an action and when observing the same action performed by another. Of the various EEG abnormalities reported, epileptiform activity has been the most consistent finding in ASDs, detected at rates of 18.9 percent up to 60.7 percent of individuals with autism. Interestingly, approximately one-third of children with ASDs go on to develop epilepsy. That being said, several reviews have concluded that there is no justification for the use of anticonvulsant medications or surgery in children with pervasive developmental disorders without seizures; that is, there is no evidence that treatments to eliminate EEG spikes will have a therapeutic benefit on the behavioral abnormalities in autism. 
EEG ALTERATIONS FROM MEDICATIONS AND DRUGS 
A great many medications, as well as substances consumed for therapeutic or recreational purposes, can produce some degree of alteration in the EEG. This section attempts to highlight those compounds most relevant to clinical and research psychiatry. 
Pharmaco-EEG 

========725========

During the 1970s, several laboratories consistently obtained a classification of psychotropic drugs on the basis of EEG changes induced by a single dose of each of these drugs in healthy subjects. This history was reviewed by Silvana Galderisi and Walter G. Sannita. The availability of Q-EEG analysis led to the development of a new research field, pharmaco-EEG. Pharmaco- EEG methods were included in preclinical studies to identify, at early stages of drug development, the therapeutic indications of new drugs, test drug bioavailability at the CNS level, determining onset, peak effect, and duration of its CNS effects, predict therapeutically useful dosages, and compare the bioavailability of different forms of psychotropic drugs (e.g., oral vs. parenteral). Pharmaco-EEG studies identified the antidepressant activities of mianserin and doxepin, which had been classified as antiallergic and anxiolytic, respectively, by preclinical studies, as well as the sedative activity of fenfluramine, classified as a psychostimulant by animal studies. The discovery of the antidepressant activity of mianserin was instrumental in the development of new animal tests which, in turn, promoted the discovery of new antidepressants, such as fluvoxamine (Luvox) and fluoxetine (Prozac). For fluvoxamine and sertraline (Zoloft), pharmaco-EEG studies enabled the identification of therapeutic doses in early stages of drug development. 
Few attempts have been made to translate pharmaco-EEG methods to psychiatric clinical settings, where this approach could inform the expectation for therapeutic benefit in response to a given psychotropic drug or dose level. Pharmaco-EEG methods for response prediction, where applied in research, mainly involve examination of Q-EEG changes following either a single administration of a drug (the so-called test-dose procedure) or at a point early in the course of treatment. Such methods, if proven capable of providing reliable prediction of the therapeutic response to treatment, could have an enormous clinical impact when considering that failure to respond to initial treatment tends to increase attrition from care, severity of prognosis, and ultimately the costs associated with psychiatric illness. 
Based on a review conducted by Armida Mucci and colleagues, early evidence favored the use of pharmaco-EEG monitoring of first-generation antipsychotic- and lithium-induced EEG abnormalities, however, these procedures were never adopted as a clinical routine. Regarding early prediction of treatment response, several QEEG studies of first-generation antipsychotics (FGA) in schizophrenia produced consistent findings, but with ultimately no clinical impact. For instance, administration of high- potency FGA medication was found to produce an increase of alpha activity, particularly in the slow alpha range (7.5 to 9.5 Hz), that several independent groups found predictive of a favorable clinical response. Using the test-dose procedure, Silvana Galderisi and colleagues demonstrated that Q-EEG changes in the slow alpha band classified FGA responders 

========726========

versus nonresponders with near 90 percent overall accuracy. 
The test-dose procedure seldom has been used in pharmaco-EEG studies of response prediction in depressed patients. In a study by Martin Bares and colleagues, Q-EEG cordance (an index combining relative and absolute power) was measured pretreatment and following 1 and 4 weeks of an antidepressant therapy in a sample of treatment-resistant inpatients. Responders showed a decrease, while nonresponders showed an increase, in prefrontal theta cordance after the first week of treatment. These findings, in line with other brain imaging results, suggest that early changes of prefrontal activity mediate the clinical response to antidepressants. 
In conclusion, Q-EEG indices could be a valuable complement to a patient’s clinical assessment, providing further guidance to inform clinician’s choice of the appropriate drug treatment. Toward this end, new guidelines have been published by the International Pharmaco-EEG Society (IPEG), with the goal of standardizing the acquisition and processing of data obtained in pharmaco-EEG studies. The introduction of these methods in clinical routine will require the replication of findings in large patient populations as well as the investigation of new drugs recently introduced in the clinical practice. 
Psychotropic Medications—General Considerations 
It is well known that psychotropic agents can affect the EEG. For the routine EEG, with the exception of the benzodiazepines and some compounds with a propensity to induce paroxysmal EEG discharges, there is little, if any, clinically relevant effect when the medication is not causing any toxicity. For example, benzodiazepines, even in small doses, generate a significant amount of beta activity that is seen diffusely (see below), and can last substantially longer (up to 2 weeks) than might be expected given the rapid response and peak occupancy (typically 1 to 4 hours) of these drugs. This response is so universal that it has been suggested that, if a particular brain region fails to exhibit the expected benzodiazepine-induced beta activity, that the area may be in some way damaged. 
Psychotropic Medications—Toxic Effects. It has long been accepted that the EEG is sensitive to the neurotoxic effects of psychotropic medications, and clinical vignettes illustrating the value of EEG in detecting a neurotoxic reaction to medications commensurate with clinical deterioration have been reported. It is often stressed that such a scenario could occur at any time during the course of treatment, because many factors impact the patient, and the symptoms could be subtle. An EEG investigation may be useful when patients undergoing long-term therapy present with clinical deterioration, particularly if the patient is known to be taking the medication, and the serum plasma levels are within the therapeutic range. 

========727========

Such clinical situations also may highlight the need for having baseline EEGs available for comparison when a patient presents with clinical exacerbation. Normative EEG databases are available, but are based on cross-sectional evaluations and do not take into account the dynamic nature of psychiatric disorders or changes due to medication status. Thus, for the purpose of detecting toxicity, routine clinical EEG remains of immediate relevance to the everyday management of patients prescribed psychotropic medication. The appearance of significant diffuse EEG slowing in a patient who is receiving psychotropic medications and whose clinical condition is not stable (particularly the elderly) should prompt the clinician to consider medication toxicity, in addition to other causes of encephalopathy (e.g., electrolyte imbalance and thyroid problems, to name only two). 
Psychotropic Drug-Induced EEG Abnormality (Nonparoxysmal and Paroxysmal). Almost from the time psychotropic medications were introduced, it was known that some of these compounds could precipitate EEG abnormalities, including paroxysmal EEG discharges (spike and spike–wave activity) in some individuals. Usually, medication-induced paroxysmal EEG activity remains behaviorally silent and is not accompanied by iatrogenic overt seizure manifestations. 
GENERAL ANESTHETICS. General anesthetics primarily induce their effects by binding to affecting neuronal ion channels. In terms of EEG signatures, anesthetics initially evoke a frontal fast activity followed by a disruption of alpha rhythms. As the anesthesia deepens, EEG activity becomes slower and of low voltage (not unlike deep sleep), and burst-suppression patterns can be observed. At the deepest levels, EEG activity ceases, and can even resemble patterns seen in comatose states. 
BARBITURATES. Barbiturates are now minimally used for medical or recreational purposes. The mechanism of action of this class of drugs involves binding to a specific site on the GABAA receptor, thus potentiating the effects of the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. When barbiturates are taken for medical or recreational purposes, beta activity is introduced into the EEG, particularly over frontal regions. Higher doses are associated with lower frequencies and dissolution of the alpha rhythm (as drowsiness and sleep ensue). Abrupt withdrawal from barbiturates after long-term exposure can produce EEGs containing generalized paroxysmal activity and spike discharges, which often are not associated with overt motor seizure manifestations. These effects may be seen for days up to 3 to 4 weeks after the last drug exposure. 
TRADITIONAL NEUROLEPTICS. The primary mechanism of action of the typical antipsychotics/neuroleptics (e.g., chlorpromazine, haloperidol) is 

========728========

antagonism of the D2 dopamine receptor. EEG changes with the neuroleptics include an increase in alpha activity, a shift to lower frequencies, and a decrease in beta activity. At high doses, seizures and spikes may occur. 
ATYPICAL ANTIPSYCHOTICS. The newer, atypical antipsychotic agents such as clozapine and risperidone have different mechanisms of action compared to traditional neuroleptics, and have affinity for 5HT2a, alpha-adrenergic, and D4 receptors, among others. EEG frequency changes during the administration of clozapine include increases in delta, theta, and beta, which are prominent over frontal, central, and parietal areas. Some paroxysmal slowing and spikes can occur, along with rare instances of seizure. Little is known regarding the EEG correlates of other atypical antipsychotic drugs. 
TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS. Older generation TCAs (e.g., imipramine, dexepin) typically act as both serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. They can increase the amount of slow and fast rhythms, decrease the frequency of alpha, and can induce paroxysmal slow waves and spikes. At higher doses, they can induce seizures, which can be particularly concerning given that tricyclics have a somewhat narrow therapeutic range. 
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS. By definition, SSRIs increase synaptic levels of serotonin by binding to the serotonin transporter. These agents tend to decrease alpha activity while increasing theta frequencies. Further, the rates of seizure are less in SSRIs compared to the tricyclics. 
LITHIUM. Lithium is still commonly used in the treatment of bipolar disorder, and can induce marked changes in the EEG. Lithium salts, particularly at intoxicating levels, are associated with diffuse EEG slowing, and paroxysmal spikes and triphasic waves, which can remain after serum levels have normalized. 
BENZODIAZEPINES. Like the barbiturates, benzodiazepines potentiate the action of GABA, although the mechanism of action entails binding to a separate benzodiazepine site on the GABAA receptor. As such, benzodiazepines are commonly used for their anxiolytic and anticonvulsant properties. Benzodiazepines at therapeutic doses are potent enhancers of beta rhythms, and in addition, slightly increase theta power. Decreases in alpha frequencies are also noted. Benzodiazepines are well known to reduce epileptiform activity, and indeed, are the first drugs of choice for status epilepticus. 
OTHER THERAPEUTIC AGENTS. While beyond the scope of the current chapter, a host of other nonpsychiatric therapeutic agents have been shown to 

========729========

induce robust effects on the EEG. Most notably, EEG changes in the context of antiepileptic drug treatment are well documented. Further, antibiotics, immunosuppressants, and antineoplastic agents, among others, have all been shown to affect EEG signatures. For a thorough treatment of these medication types, see referenced chapter by Bauer and Bauer. 
Drugs of Abuse 
The recreational use of addictive drugs remains a significant public health issue. In fact, in terms of cost of illness, it has been estimated that drug addiction ranks second only to cardiovascular disease. Hence, drug dependence is becoming of increasing concern for those involved in the assessment and treatment of psychiatric disorders. Nearly all drugs of abuse are capable of altering the frequency spectrum of the EEG, and the degree of alteration varies with recreational versus heavy use and whether the EEG was obtained during acute intoxication, during intervening periods of abstinence, or during clinical withdrawal in the addicted individual. 
With only infrequent exceptions, the use of an abuse drug does not introduce frank clinical abnormalities into the visually analyzed EEG tracing. This is especially true for recreational drug use, and is even the case for dependent and addictive use as well. For this reason, drug abuse alone is not a sufficient reason for EEG referral. Although the alterations of EEG frequency and voltage in the visually analyzed EEG produced by many abuse drugs are often unimpressive, topographic Q-EEG analyses can reveal marked alterations of the EEG spectrum that constitute significant deviations from population norms (even though the clinical implications may not be clear). Nonetheless, it is important to appreciate the various effects of different drug classes on the EEG. 
Alcohol. Ethyl alcohol, or ethanol, exhibits many of the same pharmacodynamics as the benzodiazepines (i.e., acting as a positive allosteric modulator of the GABAA receptor). Hence, many of its behavioral and EEG effects are similar. There is considerable consensus that an increase in the amount of alpha activity and a slight slowing of alpha frequency typically accompany alcohol consumption, and that higher blood alcohol levels increase the amount of theta. Some reports have indicated that chronic alcohol consumption may be associated with a lower voltage and slightly faster resting EEG, although the clinical relevance of this remains obscure. 
Alcohol withdrawal can lead to epileptic seizures as a result of perturbations of GABA and glutamate neurotransmitter/receptor function. Higher-frequency beta activity may be substantially increased in the addicted alcoholic undergoing withdrawal, and, if delirium tremens complicates the clinical picture, then excessive fast activity may dominate 

========730========

the EEG. EEG signatures during acute alcohol withdrawal can be desynchronized with low voltage, and generalized spikes may be observed. Alcohol-related seizures need to be differentiated from true epileptiform activity with comorbid alcohol dependence. Routine EEG can be extremely helpful in this regard. A normal EEG during periods of sobriety, particularly if associated with an abnormal EEG during early withdrawal, strongly suggests that the seizures are withdrawal-induced. It should be noted that the EEG tends to normalize faster (with the exception of generalized decrease in amplitude) during withdrawal from alcohol as compared to that from barbiturates. 
Opiates. The effects of opiates such as morphine and heroin on the EEG are similar to those of alcohol and involve slight reductions in alpha frequency. They also may increase the voltage of the EEG, particularly the power of theta and delta activity. Opioid anesthesia has also been shown to induce spike discharges resembling benign epileptiform transients of sleep. However, when an opiate overdose produces a comatose clinical presentation, the EEG usually consists of clinically abnormal diffuse slowing. 
Cannabis. Marijuana, or cannabis, remains one of the most prevalent drugs of abuse. Moreover, rates of its consumption are on the rise due to the trend of decriminalization and the acceptance of the use of “medical marijuana.” Cannabis, or its primary psychoactive constituent delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), affects the brain via central cannabinoid receptors (CB1Rs). CB1Rs act primarily by affecting the release of the neurotransmitters GABA and glutamate. As reviewed by Skosnik and Cortes, the effects of cannabis/THC on EEG can be broken down into effects on resting EEG (intrinsic rhythms), event-related potentials (ERPs), and evoked/induced oscillations. 
Acute cannabis smoking typically produces minimal visible effects on traditional EEG. In terms of contemporary studies utilizing Q-EEG, chronic cannabis users typically show reductions in power in the alpha-, theta-, and beta-frequency bands while in the nonintoxicated state. Acute THC has been shown to reduce resting theta power, which has been correlated with altered memory performance. Both chronic and acute cannabis/THC have been shown to disrupt the P300 ERP, which is congruent with cannabis’ effect on attention and memory. Finally, both chronic and acute cannabis/THC have been shown to disrupt sensory evoked and induced gamma rhythms, which may provide a mechanism for the perceptual- altering effects of cannabinoids. 
Finally, it should also be noted that one of the other, nonpsychoactive constituents in cannabis (cannabidiol) has been shown to have antiepileptic properties. Hence, this may represent a potential future direction in the 

========731========

“medicinal” use of cannabinoids. 
Psychostimulants. Psychostimulants such as cocaine, amphetamine, and methylphenidate act primarily increasing central dopamine function. They typically increase the amounts of beta and alpha activity, and generally reduce EEG voltage. Overdose with psychostimulants produce typical coma patterns in the EEG. The effect of psychostimulants on ERPs have yielded mixed results, although they may exhibit some effects similar to those observed in disorders of dopamine function such as schizophrenia. 
Inhalants. Inhalation abuse of volatile substances (e.g., airplane glue, cleaning fluid, paint thinner, and gasoline) can produce a nearly instantaneous sensation of euphoria, and, in the early period of use, there may be no obvious residuals after the acute response subsides. However, with continued inhalant abuse, serious neurological and neurocognitive deficits can emerge that may not be completely reversible with abstinence. The immediate effects of inhalation of volatiles on the human EEG appear not to have been well studied. Where persistent neurological or neurocognitive sequelae follow chronic inhalant abuse, clinically abnormal diffuse EEG slowing in the lower theta to upper delta range may be seen. 
Hallucinogens. Drugs such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and mescaline appear to have only minor effects on the visualized EEG and do not produce clinically relevant changes. However, recent studies of the drug ecstasy (MDMA) have shown abnormalities in several ERPs, which may be related to the purported memory-impairing effects of long-term MDMA use. 
Tobacco. Tobacco (nicotine) does not appear to produce dramatic alterations in the analog EEG. However, topographic Q-EEG analyses reveal striking EEG changes with acute exposure to, as well as withdrawal from, tobacco. The immediate effects of smoking include a decrease in slower frequencies (especially theta), increased power of frequencies in the upper one-half of the alpha-frequency band, and beta activity. Twenty-four hours of tobacco deprivation produce a marked decrease in alpha frequency, with a corresponding marked increase in the relative power (amount) of theta activity. The effects of acute smoking and abstinence are essentially opposite to one another. Further, nicotine has been associated with alterations in “sensory gating” as indexed by studies of P50 ERP suppression. However, these effects can vary depending on whether they are examined during acute nicotine exposure use or during withdrawal from nicotine. 
Caffeine. 
The use of coffee and products containing caffeine are quite 

========732========

prevalent. The use of caffeine is of little concern to the clinician interpreting the visually analyzed EEG. Withdrawal from caffeine in the caffeine-dependent individual, however, produces a markedly significant increase in the amplitude, or voltage, of theta activity—an effect that is reversible within 15 minutes of consuming one cup of coffee. 
Other Drugs of Abuse. In recent years, several novel synthetic drugs of abuse have emerged, most notably “K2/spice,” which are synthetic cannabinoids, and “bath salts,” which are synthetic psychostimulants/hallucinogens typically in the cathinone family. However, little research has been performed on these substances, particularly in the context of EEG. 
EEG AND EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH PARADIGMS 
The majority of EEG conducted in the field of psychiatry may indeed be for research purposes, including studies both on the intrinsic rhythms ascertained under normal resting conditions as well as a number of experimental paradigms associated with different sensory-perceptual and cognitive tasks. The high temporal resolution of EEG essentially provides “real-time” measurement of changes in brain activity in response to experimental conditions. EEG allows the experimenter to study changes in brain activity related to overt processes, such as differences in the auditory response to frequently versus infrequently presented stimuli, as well as more covert processes ranging from anticipation of stimulus delivery (e.g., contingent negative variation; CNV) to presupplementary motor area activation (e.g., lateralized “readiness” potential; LRP) in preparation of a button press, or consolidation-retrieval processes associated with working memory following presentation of a stimulus set. As illustrated by these examples, EEG is an ideal tool for assessing differences or change in neural activity generated as a sequence of mental operations over a time course. Regardless of whether or not such functions can be localized to discrete cortical or subcortical regions, which is never the first aim of EEG research, the ability to precisely record change in neural activity in response to known events (e.g., under controlled test conditions) enables the researcher to ask, and potentially answer, a limitless set of questions concerning human information processing and abilities affected by psychiatric illness. 
Evoked and Event-Related Potentials 
The genesis of experimental EEG research no doubt has roots in evoked potential (EP) methods, which continue to see routine clinical use in neurology practice as a test of CNS function. Briefly, EPs are electrophysiological responses to external stimuli, usually administered over several repetitions with changes in stimulus properties (e.g., 

========733========

frequency, intensity) across presentations. EPs can be generated in any sensory modality but in most clinical applications involve visual evoked potentials (VEPs) and brainstem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs) measured by EEG, or somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) measured electromyographically (i.e., EMG). An important point to keep in mind regarding the EP is that the response is time-locked to delivery of a stimulus and, therefore, can be strictly regarded as “evoked.” This point distinguishes the EP from the conceptually, and semantically, similar event-related potential (ERP), which also represents an electrophysiological response to stimulation. However, the subtle difference that distinguishes these measures can be appreciated in the examples of so-called overt versus covert brain processes provided in the preceding paragraph; whereas the overt auditory-evoked response can be regarded as an EP, examples of ERPs including the CNV and LRP occur prior to stimulus delivery and, therefore, reflect brain activity engaged in process of performing mental operations that is not necessarily time- locked, or “evoked” in response, to a stimulus. The term “event-related” has therefore replaced “evoked” over time in the research arena, where EEG recording is used to study both “bottom-up” sensory-evoked responses as well as changes in neural activity associated with higher-order cognitive processes that may be represented by induced brain signals. 
Another basic principle regarding the EP or ERP is that these potentials are usually of small magnitude (as small as a few microvolts) compared to the ongoing EEG activity (reaching 50 μV or more). This is due to the fact that EPs/ERPs represent only the components of the EEG that are consistently present across repeated trials of stimulus delivery, which may consist of hundreds of trials. The EP/ERP is extracted from the digital recording by averaging, resulting in a signal that reflects change in neural activity in response to stimulus events with ongoing background EEG activity (which is not time locked to the stimuli) canceled out by the averaging process. The resulting average is then graphed as a change in voltage over time plots and can be quantified by measures of peak amplitude and latency. 
By convention, brainstem auditory EPs are labeled with Roman number I, II, III, IV, and V, reflecting the order of the component, with components I to III generated by the auditory branch of cranial nerve VII and components IV and V by the upper brainstem. ERPs (as well as SSEPs and VEPs) are labeled according to both their polarity and latency. The letters “P” or “N” indicate positive or negative direction of deflection relative to prestimulus baseline, though whether polarity is depicted graphically in up or down direction seems to be matter of personal choice and, in many cases, polarity does reverse depending on electrode location due to the dipolar distribution of associated electrical fields. Labeling nomenclature representing ERP peak latency is done more simply, with exceptions. While 

========734========

the ERP associated with the label “P300” is a positive deflection peaking at around 300 ms following stimulus delivery, the short-hand “P3” can also be used, signifying the third positive deflection of the ERP, which follows P1 or P100 at around 100 ms and P2 or P200 at around 200 ms. Time-courses and conventional labeling of ERPs most commonly studied in psychiatry are presented in Figure 1.15–37. 
When a stimulus is presented to the brain, it travels through the receiving sensory organ and the brainstem (except for visual and olfactory stimuli) on its way to the primary cortical regions representing the particular sensory input. EPs recorded over primary sensory cortices indicate how the stimulus was received and registered by the brain, thereby providing a test of the integrity of the underlying neural architecture. For instance, the BAEP is measured in EEG waves arising within the first 10 ms following delivery of an auditory stimulus, thought to reflect the intactness of the auditory pathway, and most are useful for the diagnosis of hearing loss. It cannot be stated with certainty at this time whether basic EPs are broadly or specifically affected in psychiatric disorders, as ERPs have been the focus of most contemporary neuropsychiatric research. However, disturbances in early sensory processes are thought to be fundamental to schizophrenia pathophysiology, for example, and may conceivably involve impairment detected at the earliest stages of sensory processing. 
FIGURE 1.15–37. Schematic illustrating prototypical ERPs. Time is shown using a logarithmic scale. Stages of information processing from automatic preattentional to higher order attentional processes are shown from left to right, respectively. (Adapted from 

========735========

Skosnik PD, Cortes-Briones JA. Electroencephalography (EEG) and cannabis: from event- related potentials (ERPs) to oscillations. In: Preedy VR, ed. The Neuropathology of Drug Addictions and Substance Misuse. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science; 2016.) 
Regarding stage of information processing, a basic delineation has been made between early-latency potentials, which would include the BAEP and other components occurring before 10 ms poststimulus, mid-latency potentials occurring up to 200 ms, and long latency potentials, occurring after 200 ms. As a general rule of thumb, early-latency potentials are thought to mainly reflect processing dependent on exogenous factors, determined outside of the CNS, such as stimulus intensity or rate. Exogenous potentials can be measured regardless of a subject’s level of consciousness, are thought to be fundamentally unaffected by cognitive processes, and represent basic sensory registration. Once received by the brain, a stimulus undergoes psychological processing and evaluation, and these operations influence later ERP waves that are broadly distributed outside of primary sensory cortices. While ERPs also contain exogenous components (though typically recorded at sampling rates too slow to accurately measure early latency potentials), mid-latency and long latency potentials tend to be of most interest to experimental research. In later stages of information processing, ERPs increasingly reflect activity relating to cognitive processes, such as anticipation, encoding, and recognition, thus can be influenced by level of alertness and attentional resources devoted to the experimental task. Accordingly, mid-latency and late ERPs mainly reflect endogenous potentials, with measurements of amplitude or other characteristics reflecting the interaction of stimulus properties and experimental task demands with individual differences in information processing. Because ERPs are sensitive to experimental manipulations, various paradigms have been developed to study brain function at the interface of sensory and cognitive processing. These paradigms have demonstrated many abnormalities during mid-latency and later processes across the psychiatry research literature, and thus are of considerable interest for their potential as clinical tools. 
Middle Latency Components (P50 and N100) 
Three of the most examined ERP components in the auditory modality are designated P50 (a positive component occurring between 35 and 80 ms after stimulus onset), N100 (a negative component occurring between 80 and 150 ms after stimulus onset), and P200 (a positive component occurring between 150 and 250 ms after stimulus onset). Figure 1.15–37 shows a typical example of these mid-latency ERPs. These components share the characteristic that their amplitude decreases with repetition (habituation or sensory gating). The P50 and N100 components have been studied extensively in psychiatric patients. 

========736========

The P50 is a positive voltage, middle latency ERP component peaking at around 50 ms poststimulus, best elicited by discrete auditory stimuli (e.g., brief white noise clicks). In the standard P50 gating or “dual-click” paradigm, the amplitude of the P50 to a second paired click (S2) is attenuated relative to the P50 amplitude to the first click (S1). A 500-ms interstimulus interval is typically utilized, and is optimum to elicit gating. While the P50 to S1 is thought to be related to the capacity of the brain to register salient stimuli, the reduction of the P50 amplitude to S2 (compared to S1) reflects the automatic suppression or inhibitory gating of redundant and irrelevant stimuli. It is thought to be mediated by the hippocampus, temporoparietal region, auditory cortex, and prefrontal cortex. Deficient P50 suppression is commonly associated with schizophrenia, and has been proposed as a candidate endophenotype for psychosis risk (representing a physiologically detectable feature linked to underlying genetic cause of illness), supported in part by evidence for linkage to several psychosis risk genes and by similar reduction in P50 suppression observed in first-degree family members of schizophrenia probands. Evidence for an inhibitory abnormality (i.e., sensory gating deficit) in schizophrenia patients has been accumulating over the past 30 years. In an early meta-analysis of proposed endophenotypes of schizophrenia, sensory gating of the P50 response was found to represent a magnitude of deficit equal to or greater than the most robust findings reported across neuroimaging and behavioral studies. 
The N100 component is a large exogenous ERP that exists regardless of task demands (although it can be modulated by attention). The N100 is generally associated with early perceptual processing with origins in the primary sensory cortices and is elicited in response to various forms of auditory and visual stimuli, regardless of experimental context. Of note, while the visual N100 is regionally localized over occipital and posterior parietal electrode sites, the N100 (like all auditory ERPs) tends to be maximal over the central or fronto-central sites, representing the confluence of potentials generated in bilateral auditory cortices. The N100 component has also been shown to exhibit suppression similar to the P50 ERP when assessed using the dual-click paradigm, and is similarly affected in schizophrenia patients. However, work by Jason Johannesen and colleagues has demonstrated that reductions in N100 amplitude in schizophrenia, whether elicited by paired clicks or by pure tones spaced approximately 1,200 ms apart, have equally large effect sizes when contrasted against healthy comparison subjects, and exceed effect sizes obtained by measures of P50 suppression and P300 amplitude and latency measures in the same sample. Furthermore, while P50 and P300 measures were not found to differentiate schizophrenia versus bipolar disorder above chance level, N100 provided unique variance in classification analysis differentiating these psychiatric groups with 72 percent overall accuracy, 

========737========

only slightly less than achieved in an optimal model classifying schizophrenia against matched healthy participants (79 percent accuracy). Therefore, auditory processes indexed by the N100 appear to represent a stable (e.g., obtained in different experimental contexts), robust, and perhaps diagnostically specific, neurophysiologic deficit among individuals with schizophrenia. 
P300 
The P300 is a late positive, postattentional ERP component thought to be related to directed attention, contextual updating of working memory, and the attribution of salience to deviant or novel stimuli. This response is typically elicited utilizing standard “oddball” paradigms in which low- probability target stimuli (~10 to 20 percent) are embedded within a repeating sequence of high-probability standard stimuli (~80 to 90 percent) differing in some physical dimension (e.g., frequency, duration, amplitude). It this thought that the P300, particularly the P300b component (elicited in response to designated targets), reflects activity from a distributed neural network including areas, such as, thalamus, hippocampus, inferior parietal lobe, superior temporal gyrus, and frontal cortex. Cognitive and affective neuroscientists have been conducting basic research on P300 since it was discovered over 40 years ago, providing a rich knowledge base that has yet to be fully exploited by clinical scientists. 
Mismatch Negativity 
The mismatch negativity (MMN) is an automatic, preattentive, negative voltage ERP component that is generated primarily in the superior temporal and prefrontal cortex. The MMN is hypothesized to index the automatic, preattentive processing of the “mismatch” between standard and periodic deviant stimuli, indexed by the amplitude of a negative component over latencies of 100 to 200 ms measured in waveforms created by the subtraction of ERPs produced by the deviant and standard stimuli. The MMN experiment is similar to the P300 oddball paradigm where serial presentation of a standard stimulus (e.g., 10-ms presentation of 1,000 Hz tone) is occasionally interrupted by deviants that differ in subtle ways (e.g., 10-ms presentation of 1,500 Hz tone, 50-ms presentation of 1,000 Hz tone). However, unlike the P300, attention to the stimuli is not required, and is normally redirected from the primary auditory discrimination task by a concurrent, noninterfering, task (e.g., reading, visual target detection). Also unlike the P300, which is sensitive to both auditory and visual stimuli, MMN has been studied mostly as it relates to acoustic information processing. Because it is virtually sensitive to any feature of an acoustic stimulus, including frequency, duration, and learned features such as rhythmic patterns and timing of stimulus delivery, the MMN has been 

========738========

especially useful in the evaluation of problems associated with specific aspects of auditory processing. Deviations in MMN are reported across several psychiatry disorders, including depression, alcoholism, and dementia, but have received the most attention in schizophrenia. 
In a longitudinal investigation of first-hospitalized schizophrenia patients, Dean F. Salisbury and colleagues have shown that reduction in the MMN over a 1.5-year period following first hospitalization was associated with progressive reductions in Heschl gyrus gray matter volumes in schizophrenia but not in psychotic bipolar or healthy comparison subjects, who evidenced no significant change in or correlation between MMN and gray matter measures. This important finding links an experimental electrophysiological process to brain structure, and highlights the sensitivity of MMN to a neurodegenerative processes that may be uniquely involved in the etiology of schizophrenia. 
Error-Related Negativity 
The error-related negativity (ERN), typically studied in a choice reaction time task, occurs approximately 60 to 150 ms after an incorrect choice has been made. The ERN has been posited to reflect sensitivity to error detection, the remedial actions that are taken to compensate for the error, and the conflict generated by the process. Time–frequency analysis indicates that the ERN is mainly comprised of anterior theta activity that appears to originate from the ACC, part of a neural system involved in behavioral regulation and self-monitoring. Because it appears to involve both affective and cognitive information processing and evaluation, it is not surprising that the ERN is also sensitive to clinical features of various psychiatric disorders, including OCD and other anxiety disorders, major depression, and externalizing psychopathology related to behavioral disinhibition. The findings for these studies suggest that anxious individuals, because they generate larger ERNs, are more sensitive to making errors, while depressed individuals and those with disorders associated with behavioral disinhibition are less so. These results are generally consistent with expectations given the clinical characterization of these disorders. For instance, Jason Hall and colleagues note that a common externalizing behavioral pattern involves a failure to learn from experience, possibly suggesting a deficit in the ability to self-monitor ongoing behavior for errors, with this impairment reflected in the diminished ERN. 
EEG in the Systematic Study of Psychopathology. It is now firmly established that ERP anomalies are associated with a wide variety of psychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia, mood disorder, anxiety, ADHD, and substance abuse disorders, which a voluminous research literature associated with each. For sake of illustrating the depth of science 

========739========

pertaining to early risk indication, genetics, neurochemical involvement, and psychiatric comorbidities, major findings from the field of alcohol research are briefly summarized. 
It has been shown repeatedly that the young offspring of alcoholics demonstrate P300 amplitude reduction despite their lack of exposure to alcohol, thus suggesting that this anomaly may represent an endophenotype tapping the underlying genetic risk for alcoholism. Further work supporting diminished P300 amplitude as an endophenotype for alcoholism includes studies showing that reductions in P300 amplitude precede the subsequent development of alcoholism and that unaffected twins from pairs discordant for alcoholism have, like their affected co-twin, reduced P300. 
Research with this putative endophenotype also is helping to explain patterns of psychiatric comorbidity often observed with alcoholism. These include childhood disruptive disorders that often precede it, such as ADHD and conduct disorder, and other disorders associated with behavioral disinhibition, such as antisocial personality disorder and other SUDs. Figure 1.15–38 illustrates how reduced P300 amplitude may be a common feature among these disorders. To the extent that P300 amplitude reduction indexes underlying genetic risk, the observed pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that the covariation among these disorders reflects shared genetic influences. There is ample evidence to support this notion, including twin and family linkage studies, showing that shared genes account for most of variance in P300 amplitude among these disorders. 
Because ERPs are derived from the EEG, it is possible to use time– frequency analysis to identify the constituent EEG waves, which, because they are time-locked to the stimulus presentation, compose the ERP waveform. This type of analysis in effect renders a possible determination of the amount of each EEG frequency present at each point in time elapsing from the onset of a stimulus to the resolution of the associated ERP. These transient-evoked oscillations (Fig. 1.15–19) can be partitioned into the same frequency bands identified for spontaneous EEG, but represent stimulus-elicited rhythms that are likely to serve roles that are functionally different than those associated with their appearance in resting EEG. For example, while higher resting low frequency (e.g., delta, theta) is associated with pathology in a number of clinical conditions, higher activation of low- frequency activity under task-related conditions (e.g., working memory) is often interpreted to indicate better brain function. With respect to the P300 ERP, higher amplitude (better function) is mainly dependent on activation of delta and theta frequencies, accompanied by a reduction in alpha frequency. 
Transient-evoked oscillations also are beginning to provide insights regarding brain dynamics and psychopathology, especially regarding the 

========740========

development of alcohol dependence. Reduced delta- and theta-evoked oscillations have been associated with risk for the development of alcoholism over and above the risk associated with reduced P300 amplitude, suggesting that the decomposition of the P300 ERP into constituent oscillatory components may improve sensitivity of this measure over the broadband signal (typically filtered at 0.5 to 12 Hz or as high as 24 Hz) characterized by the ERP. These evoked oscillations have also been linked to gene variants involved in cholinergic and GABAergic neurotransmitter systems, which have been implicated in the neurochemical pathways involved in many psychiatric conditions. This line of ERP or evoked oscillation research conducted in alcoholism exemplifies an evolving scientific effort to use experimental electrophysiological assays of human information processing as fundamentally biologic, and perhaps genetically related, indicators of risk for the development of psychiatric disorders. 
FIGURE 1.15–38.Thegrandaverageevent-relatedpotential(ERP)waveformsformale, 17-year-old participants in the Minnesota Twin Family Study with a diagnosis of attention- deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), conduct disorder (CD), alcohol use disorder, and illicit drug use disorder. The diagnostic group (solid line) is plotted against that of a comparison group (dashed line, n = 71) selected to be free of these disorders. In each case, P300 amplitude, here with an onset latency of about 300 ms and a peak latency of 500 ms, is significantly attenuated in the affected teenagers. 
TRANSLATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS TO CLINICAL APPLICATIONS 
In the absence of a guiding system or a systematized and accepted approach, biological findings that carry significant promise as diagnostic tests are likely to continue to be interesting research findings without translating into clinically meaningful lab tests or be disseminated to wide 

========741========

use prematurely, hindering a steady evolution of the field of applied electrophysiology. To address this translational gap, a four-step approach for developing diagnostic tests in psychiatry has been proposed by Nash Boutros and Cynthia Arfken (Table 1.15–1). These final thoughts are offered as future directions and, perhaps, a roadmap from eventually moving reliable and clinically informative electrophysiological findings from the laboratory to the clinic. 
Step 1, a biological variable, is observed to be deviant from healthy controls in a particular patient population. The demonstration of test– retest reliability of the finding using blinding procedures is an essential component of this early step. Step 2 is the demonstration of potential clinical usefulness of the specific finding. The two most important objectives at this step are demonstration of difference between the target patient population and appropriate control groups (these should be groups of patients with diagnoses that commonly appear on the differential diagnostic lists of the target disorder). Estimation of the effect size of the finding could be a reasonable guide to which findings should be considered good candidates for Step 3 studies. During step 3, the performance characteristics of the test should be established. Specifically, the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of the biological marker should be examined. Step 4 defines the clinical application of the test and helps standardize the technique used in large and multicenter clinical trials. Multicenter trials should guide methodology for standardization of laboratory procedures used to conduct the test as well as obtaining data regarding cost effectiveness and impact on both short-term and long-term clinical outcomes. It is strongly recommended that studies describing efforts toward developing diagnostic testing should adhere to the guidelines proposed by the Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy (STARD) initiative. 
REFERENCES 
Amzica F, Lopes da Silva FH. Cellular substrates of brain rhythms. In: Schomer DL, Lopes da Silva FH, eds. Niedermeyer’s Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business; 2011. 
*Arciniegas DB. Clinical electrophysiologic assessments and mild traumatic brain injury: state- of-the-science and implications for clinical practice. Int J Psychophysiol. 2011;82:41. Bauer G, Bauer R. EEG, drug effects, and central nervous system poisoning. In: Schomer DL, Lopes da Silva FH, eds. Niedermeyer’s Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business; 2011. 
Boutros NN, Mirolo HA, Struve F. Normative data for the unquantified EEG: Examination of adequacy for neuropsychiatric research. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2005;17:84. 

========742========

Boutros NN, Arfken CL. A four-step approach to developing diagnostic testing in psychiatry. Clin EEG Neurosci. 2007;38:62. 
Boutros NN, Arfken C, Galderisi S, Warrick J, Pratt G. The status of EEG abnormality as a diagnostic test for schizophrenia. Schizophr Res. 2008;99:225. 
Chang BS, Schomer DL, Niedermeyer E. Normal EEG and sleep: adults and elderly. In: Schomer DL, Lopes da Silva FH, eds. Niedermeyer’s Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business; 2011. 
Chang BS, Schomer DL, Niedermeyer E. Epilepsy in adults and the elderly. In: Schomer DL, Lopes da Silva FH, eds. Niedermeyer’s Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business; 2011. 
Galderisi S, Sannita WG. Pharmaco-EEG: a history of progress and a missed opportunity. Clin EEG Neurosci. 2006;37:61. 
*Grant AC, Abdel-Baki SG, Weedon J, et al. EEG interpretation reliability and interpreter confidence: a large single-center study. Epilepsy Behav. 2014;32:102. 
Handy TC. Event-Related Potentials: A Methods Handbook. MIT Press; 2005. 
Hartman AL, Lesser RP. Brain tumors and other space-occupying lesions. In: Schomer DL, Lopes da Silva FH, eds. Niedermeyer’s Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business; 2011. 
Herrmann CS, Fründ I, Lenz D. Human gamma-band activity: a review on cognitive and behavioral correlates and network models. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2010;34:981. 
*Jobert M, Wilson FJ, Ruigt GS, Brunovsky M, Prichep LS, Drinkenburg WH. IPEG Pharmaco- EEG guidelines committee: guidelines for the recording and evaluation of pharmaco-EEG data in man: the International Pharmaco-EEG Society (IPEG). Neuropsychobiology. 2012;66:201. Johannesen JK, O’Donnell BF, Shekhar A, McGrew JH, Hetrick WP. Diagnostic specificity of neurophysiological endophenotypes in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Schizophr Bull. 2013;39:1219. 
Kockaya G, Wertheimer A. What are the top most costly diseases for USA? The alignment of burden of illness with prevention and screening expenditures. Health. 2010;2:1174. 
Krystal AD. Psychiatric disorders and EEG. In: Schomer DL, Lopes da Silva FH, eds. Niedermeyer’s Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business; 2011. Lehmann C, Koenig T, Jelic V, Prichep L, John RE. Application and comparison of classification algorithms for recognition of Alzheimer’s disease in electrical brain activity (EEG). J Neurosci Methods. 2007;61:342. 
*Leiser SC, Dunlop J, Bowlby MR, Devilbiss DM. Aligning strategies for using EEG as a surrogate biomarker: a review of preclinical and clinical research. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011;81:1408. *Malone SM, Burwell SJ, Vaidyanathan U, Miller MB, McGue M, Iacono WG. Heritability and molecular-genetic basis of resting EEG activity: a genome-wide association study. Psychophysiology. 2014;51:1225. 
Mucci A, Volpe U, Merlotti E, Bucci P, Galderisi S. Pharmaco-EEG in psychiatry. Clin EEG 

========743========

Neurosci. 2006;37:81. 
Narayanan B, Soh P, Calhoun VD, et al. Multivariate genetic determinants of EEG oscillations in schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar disorder from the BSNIP study. Transl Psychiatry. 2015;5:e588. 
Niedermeyer E, Lopes da Silva FH, eds. Neidermeyer’s Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, And Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business; 2011. 
Nunez PL, Srinivasan R. Electric Fields of the Brain: The Neurophysics of EEG. Oxford University Press; 2006. 
Pang T, Selvitelli M, Schomer DI, Niedermeyer E. Metabolic disorders in EEG. In: Schomer DL, Lopes da Silva FH, eds. Niedermeyer’s Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business; 2011. 
Salisbury DF, Kuroki N, Kasai K, Shenton ME, McCarley RW. Progressive and interrelated functional and structural evidence of post-onset brain reduction in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64:521. 
Schmidt LA, Segalowitz SJ. Developmental Psychophysiology: Theory, Systems, and Methods. Cambridge University Press; 2007. 
Skosnik PD, Cortes-Briones JA. Electroencephalography (EEG) and cannabis: from event-related potentials (ERPs) to oscillations. In: Preedy VR, ed. The Neuropathology of Drug Addictions and Substance Misuse. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science; 2016. 
Smith SJ. EEG in the diagnosis, classification, and management of patients with epilepsy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2005;76:ii2. 
Thatcher RW. Validity and reliability of quantitative electroencephalography. J Neurother. 2010;14:122. 
▲ 1.16 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy: Basic Principles and Recent Findings in Neuropsychiatric Disorders 
GRAEME F. MASON, PH.D., JOHN H. KRYSTAL, M.D., AND GERARD SANACORA, M.D., PH.D. 
Historically the role of MRI in psychiatry has been limited to the use of structural MRI in ruling out known organic causes of emotional, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms. At present there is a growing interest in the use of MR technology in psychiatry largely owing to its noninvasive nature and its increasing ability to provide information on the structure, function, and physiology of the brain. While the potential usefulness of MR in the diagnosis of psychiatric disorders is immense, the current clinical applications remain extremely limited. However, the last decade has seen an explosion of MR research applications related to the study of the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders and the mechanisms of action related to various forms of treatment. Imaging measures are also now included explicitly in the National Institute of Health’s Research Domain 

========744========

Criteria (RDoC). In the context of the RDoC, the imaging results are specifically for research purposes, attempting to characterize pathophysiological processes across a spectrum of disorders with various forms of measurements, rather than limiting imaging to its standard diagnostic purposes. 
HISTORY 
MRI and other MR techniques were originally called nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The “nuclear” part of the name derives from the basis of the technique in energy transfer into and out of the nuclei of atoms. The “magnetic” in the name refers to the use of magnetic fields in the experimental environment. The “resonance” component of the name comes from the use of particular frequencies of energy used for the measurements. Since its introduction, NMR has been used for basic investigations of chemistry and physics, but with its introduction to medical applications, the word “nuclear” has generally been dropped because patients may associate it erroneously with ionizing radiation, nuclear power, and nuclear weapons. A history and survey of many MR techniques has been reviewed recently (Ai et al., 2012). 
In 1946, Edward Purcell (1912–1997) and Felix Bloch (1905–1983) independently demonstrated NMR at Harvard and Stanford Universities, and for this discovery they shared the 1952 Nobel Prize in Physics. Early NMR measurements were performed with a swept field, in which a narrow- banded radio frequency application was performed as the sample was exposed to a time-varying magnetic field. To enhance the efficiency of the measurement, pulse-and-Fourier-transform NMR was developed and successfully demonstrated at Varian Instruments in Palo Alto, California, in 1964 by Richard Ernst (born 1933), who proceeded to extend the concept to MRI and received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1991. Raymond Damadian, a New York physician, observed in 1969 that tumors had different MR-related characteristics that provide the potential to differentiate cancerous tissue from healthy tissue, thereby demonstrating a potential clinical application of NMR. Dr. Damadian applied for the first patent for an MRI machine in 1972, in which he described the purpose of the device. In 1973, Zenuemon Abe and colleagues published a method that produced images by a slow process of acquiring signals sequentially as the position of the object was shifted through a series of positions, and in 1976 Dr. Damadian published a similar method applied to a mouse. A dramatic breakthrough for MRI occurred when Paul Lauterbur (1929–2007) of SUNY Stony Brook and Sir Peter Mansfield (born 1933) of Nottingham, England, independently developed the acquisition of MRI by means of magnetic field gradients, which will be discussed in this chapter, and that achievement led them to share the 2003 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. 

========745========

BASIC PHYSICS OF NMR, MRS, AND MRI 
For human use, the techniques are typically called MRI and MRS. Although MR methods are based on a quantum mechanical property called spin, they make use of phenomena that for most purposes are most appropriately described using classical mechanics. 
Spin, the Larmor Frequency, and Net Magnetization 
The primary points of this section are (1) only certain species of nuclei can be detected, (2) the frequency of detection depends on the species of nucleus observed and the strength of the magnetic field of the scanner, and (3) only a very small fraction of the nuclei can actually be detected. 
Nucleus 1H 
31P 
13C 
15N 17O 19F 
23Na 2H 7Li 
Table 1.16–1. 
MR-Detectible Nuclei and Some of Their Applications to Brain Research 
γ 
(rad/Gauss Sensitivity 
s) (% of 1H) Application 
26,752 100.0 Amino acid neurotransmitters and neuronal and glial 
compounds; imaging of water and lipids 
10,839 .0666 High-energy phosphate levels, intracellular pH, phospholipid 
head groups 
6,728 .0174 Metabolism of amino acid neurotransmitters, glucose, lipids, 
acetate 
−2,713 –3.83 × 10−4 Metabolism of ammonia, amino acids 
−3,628 1.89 × 10−7 Cerebral oxygen consumption, production of H2O 
25,182 83.5 Cerebral pharmacokinetics of fluorinated drugs like fluoxetine 
and fluvoxamine 
7,081 1.60 × 10−3 Effects of hypoxia, pharmacologic challenges to sodium pumps 
4,107 1.89 × 10−8 Metabolism of fats, glucose 
10,398 4.62 × 10−3 Cerebral pharmacokinetics of lithium 
The fundamental basis of MRI and MRS lies in quantum mechanics, because the atomic nuclei that produce the signals are quantum particles. The nuclei carry a positive electrical charge, and observable nuclei have a quantum mechanical characteristic called spin. Spin of ½ is one of the basic properties of protons and neutrons. That is, a proton or a neutron can have spin of either +½ or −½, and when neutrons and protons combine to form a nucleus, their spin values combine to yield a nucleus with the net of their spins. The most abundant form of hydrogen has a nucleus that is simply a proton, so the spin of the nucleus of 
1H 
is ±½. The most common form of carbon has a nucleus that is composed of six protons and six neutrons, half with spin +½ and half with spin −½, such that in combination they yield a nucleus for 
12C 
that has no spin; thus, 
12C 
is not observable with MR techniques. However, 1.1 percent of naturally 

========746========

occurring carbon is 
13C, 
and the additional neutron that resides within its nucleus confers upon 
13C 
a net spin of ½; therefore, 
13C 
can be observed with MR techniques. Table 1.16–1 lists several MR-observable nuclei that have been applied to study the human brain. 
Nuclei that have nonzero spin can be detected with NMR by applying energy and observing their responses, and so investigators who develop MR technology often discuss the behavior of spins in a magnetic field and the manipulation of spins during a measurement. When a charged particle like the atomic nucleus has spin, it produces a magnetic dipole, which can be imagined as a small bar magnet with North and South ends. 
When the nuclei with spin are placed in a strong magnetic field of magnitude B0, they precess around the axis of that field (Fig. 1.16–1) with a frequency called the Larmor frequency or the resonance frequency. 
v = γB0/2π 
(1) 
The Larmor frequency is the frequency that must be transmitted to affect the sample, and it is also the frequency that is received by the MR scanner. Equation 1 shows that the Larmor frequency depends on the strength of the static magnetic field, as well as on γ. The frequency of detection of a nucleus in a clinical magnet operating at a magnetic field strength B0 of 3 Tesla (abbreviated 3 T) is twice the frequency of detection of the same nucleus at 1.5 T. The Larmor frequency of the most abundant isotope of hydrogen, 
1H, 
is 63 MHz at 1.5 T and 126 MHz at 3 T. These frequencies lie in the FM band of the radio, and accordingly MR scanners are usually in rooms that are electrically sealed to prevent ambient signals from contributing what looks like noise in the data. The other variable that affects the frequency is γ, the gyromagnetic ratio, which differs for each species of nucleus. So, because the value of γ for the common hydrogen nucleus is approximately four times as large as that for 
13C, 
the Larmor frequency of hydrogen is about four times as large as that of 
13C. 
The reason for the large static magnetic field is to create a condition called net magnetization. In the absence of an external magnetic field, the spins of the nuclei in the magnetic field are oriented randomly in space. To create the potential for a signal, some nonrandomness must be introduced. It is this small fraction of the total nuclei that MR scanners can detect, and the greater the difference in the number of particles in the two energy states, the larger will be the signal that can be detected from the sample. The net magnetization expressed as a fraction the total spins is given by the Boltzmann distribution 
Nhigh/Nlow = 1 −vhB0/2πkT 
(2) 
where k is Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature. Most 

========747========

people have little occasion to use Eq. 2, but it illustrates several important features of NMR measurements. First, a larger net magnetization can be obtained if a nucleus with a larger gyromagnetic ratio is used. Hydrogen has the largest ratio and has the sensitivity to be used for routine anatomic and other imaging. Sodium has a low ratio and is less sensitive and more difficult to use for imaging. Second, larger B0 yields more net magnetization, so a stronger magnet can yield more signal. This is why Earth’s field MR has not been used for studies of the brain: a 3-T magnet is 67,000 times stronger than the Earth’s average magnetic field, and so the signal available at Earth’s field is thousands of times lower. Third, lower temperature adds signal, but for measurements in humans, T is usually fixed at about 37°C. In practical terms, measurements on 3 T machines have twice the signal available from a 1.5 T machine. Finally, if one plugs in typical temperatures and magnetic field strengths used for human clinical scans, the equation shows that for hydrogen the net magnetization consists of only 0.0004 to 0.0008 percent of the nuclei in the sample. 
FIGURE 1.16–1. Individually, nuclei are particles that have the quantum mechanical property spin. By virtue of their charge and the spin, they behave as small magnets that can be aligned either with or against the large magnetic field of the MR scanner (B0), rotating at the Larmor frequency. 

========748========

FIGURE 1.16–2. Magnetization in an MR experiment shown with perspectives of quantum and classical mechanics. A: Quantum mechanical: In the presence of an external magnetic field, the individual spins are aligned with or against the field, and a slight majority, on the order of just 0.0004 percent, is aligned with the field. The very small size of this ratio is the reason that MR is considered to be insensitive compared to other forms of imaging. When a radiofrequency burst is applied at the Larmor frequency of the spins, to apply what is called a 90-degree pulse, the net distribution is randomized so that the spins are evenly distributed with and against the field. At the same time that the spins are randomized, they acquire phase coherence, coming together in one orientation with respect to the XY plane. B: Classic mechanical: In the presence of the external magnetic field, there exists a magnetization vector whose size is proportional to the sum of the small majority of spins that have net alignment with the field. When a 90-degree pulse is applied, the magnetization vector rotates to the XY plane. C: After the excitation, the magnetization vector gradually returns to the Z axis according to T1 relaxation, as shown by the progressively darkening arrows that represent the continual movement of the vector toward Z. At the same time, phase coherence is lost due to interactions among spins, according to T2 relaxation, and inhomogeneities of magnetic field in the sample cause additional losses of phase coherence, according to T2* decay. 

========749========

Detection of the Net Magnetization 
The techniques of MRS and MRI in vivo detect the quantities of net magnetization in various locations and elucidate properties of the cellular environment. For MRS, there is the particular purpose of discovering in what chemicals the magnetization resides, and for MRI, the specific purpose is to measure the spatial distribution of the magnetization. Having the nuclei precess at the Larmor frequency and follow a net distribution oriented along the scanner’s magnetic field set the stage for MR detection, but one more component is necessary to obtain a signal. 
Within seconds of placing a subject in the scanner, the nuclei in the brain are in a fully relaxed state. In the jargon of MR, a fully relaxed state is one in which the nuclei have their slight orientation with the magnetic field, according to their Boltzmann distribution. In this condition, there is no energy emitted from the sample, the phases of the nuclei in their precession are random, and the net magnetization cannot be detected. At this point, no signal is detected in the sample because of the lack of emission of energy, and even if energy were emitted by individual nuclei, their phases of precession are distributed randomly around the Z axis, so any energy emitted by one nucleus would be canceled by energy emitted by one that is opposite in phase. To detect the net magnetization, a magnetic field oscillating at the Larmor frequency (called radio frequency, or RF) is first applied, generally lasting a few hundred microseconds to a few milliseconds, and the nuclei absorb energy from the transmission, which causes the net magnetization to rotate out of alignment with the large, static magnetic field of the scanner (Fig. 1.16–2A). At the same time, the nuclei acquire phase coherence. That is, they precess together instead of having a random distribution about the Z axis. As the net magnetization returns to its alignment with the magnetic field, the nuclei emit energy, also at the Larmor frequency. The energy is detected with a probe, sometimes also called a coil, which is a placed around or against the part of the body that is being studied. In many cases, the same coil is used for transmission and detection. 
As the net magnetization is rotated away from the magnetic field orientation, any magnetization that is in the XY plane is called transverse magnetization (Fig. 1.16–2B) In the terminology of classical mechanics, MR can only detect the component of the magnetization vector that lies in the XY plane. If less energy is used, then a lower flip angle is achieved, and less signal can be detected. It is possible to rotate the magnetization through any angle, including 180 degrees, which is a special rotation called an inversion, and it is used frequently for MRI and MRS. 
Quantum and Classical Mechanics 

========750========

Many explanations of MRI and MRS are based principally on quantum mechanics. The explanations are often daunting and are generally unnecessary. A phenomenon is called “quantum mechanical” if classical mechanics are unable to explain the observed behavior. For example, a rotating bicycle wheel can be described with great effort using quantum mechanical calculations, but the wheel’s behavior is explained with great precision and considerably greater ease with classical mechanics. Therefore, a rotating bicycle wheel is considered a classical phenomenon, not a quantum mechanical phenomenon. In the case of MR, observations of a single spin can be explained only with quantum mechanics, but when many spins are observed, as is the case for an MRI study of the brain, the nuclei behave as a set of spins that have a continuum of orientations, though slightly biased along the magnetic field. The behavior is explained completely in the realm of classical mechanics. This point is described in detail by Hanson (1998). 
T1, T2, and T2* Relaxation 
Once the magnetization vector has been rotated to the XY plane, phenomena called relaxation eliminate the signal and return the vector to the Z axis through exponential processes called T1 and T2 relaxation, or longitudinal and transverse relaxation, respectively. Longitudinal relaxation returns the magnetization to the Z axis at a rate governed by the exponential time constant T1 (Fig. 1.16–2B). As will be explained later, this relationship can be used to create contrast among materials with different values of T1, such as gray matter and white matter. 
Repeating scans too rapidly with too large an excitation angle leads to a reduction in signal amplitude through a process called saturation. Transverse magnetization can only be generated from Z magnetization, which is created during the T1 relaxation process. Therefore, if too little time is allowed for recovery of Z magnetization, then the signal will be reduced on repeated scans. For full relaxation after a 90 degrees pulse, typically a delay of several seconds is required. Less saturation occurs when a lower angle of excitation is used, but that also results in the generation of less transverse magnetization. In practice, the most efficient acquisitions incorporate a compromise, in which an excitation angle of something less than 90 degrees is used and an interscan delay of less than three T1’s is allowed between scans. 
In vivo, T1 relaxation depends on the static magnetic field strength, the rate of tumbling of the molecules in which the spins reside, and the distance between the relaxing nucleus and other charged spins in the sample. As a consequence, as magnetic field strength rises, the value of T1 increases. As will be shown later, the dependence of T1 on field strength can 

========751========

be exploited to make more effective experiments but can also place some limitations on measurements at different magnetic field strengths. 
For measurements in vivo, long before the magnetization vector has returned to the Z axis, the signal decays to nothing because of T2 relaxation (Fig. 1.16–2B). T2 relaxation destroys the phase coherence of the component of the magnetization in the XY plane, such that the MR signal decays in an exponential process. The signal gradually dies away, yielding a free induction decay, or FID. T2 relaxation is primarily due to interactions of the nucleus with other spins in the sample, and in the brain in vivo its value is largely independent of magnetic field strength. As phase coherence is lost, the signal from each spin in the sample becomes increasingly canceled by another spin in the sample, so that gradually the average signal coming from the sample approaches zero. The value of T2 depends largely on the mobility of the molecule in which the nucleus resides: The greater the restrictions on motion, the shorter will be the T2. For example, white matter has abundant, rigid structure that prevents water from diffusing rapidly and rotating freely, and white matter has a shorter T1 than CSF, in which the water is free to rotate. The differences between white matter and gray matter provide an effective basis for high contrast for diseases in which fluid must be emphasized in MRI. The T2 of bone is very short and is therefore not typically detected in MRI or MRS. 
A parameter related to T2 is T2*, which results from inhomogeneity of the magnetic field. Such inhomogeneity can derive from macroscopic causes, such as an interface between tissue and bone or air. The sinuses, ear canals, and temporal bones cause large inhomogeneities that are often troublesome for MRI and MRS studies. Inhomogeneities also result from microscopic influences, such as the presence of deoxyhemoglobin. T2* is the time constant for an exponential loss of phase coherence, but the process is illustrated as a dephasing of magnetization in different parts of the sample (Fig. 1.16–2B). The sample volume could be an image pixel or region selected for an MRS measurement. If one corner of an image pixel experiences a slightly higher magnetic field strength, then the Larmor frequency in that corner will be a little higher. Perhaps the center of the image pixel has a lower frequency, so the Larmor frequency in the middle of the pixel will be lower. As time progresses, the magnetization in different parts of the sample will eventually randomize their phase, such that any signal coming from one part of the sample will be canceled by signals with the opposite phase from another part of the sample. In certain kinds of MRI and MRS studies, such effects can dramatically reduce a signal, causing regional darkening of images in MRI and blurring and loss of signal in MRS. 
Influences on Frequency and Identification of Molecules in MRS Measurements 

========752========

The main points of this section are that the major factors that influence a resonance frequency are (1) magnetic field strength and (2) gyromagnetic ratio, which affect primarily what transmitter frequency will be used. Smaller influences are the electron cloud conformation and the interactions with other nuclei in the molecule, which together imbue MRS with its ability to distinguish neurochemicals from one another. 
The primary actor in the differentiation of chemicals is shielding, a phenomenon in which the electron cloud in a molecule partially blocks the static magnetic field that penetrates to the nucleus. Consider the cases of glutamate and glutamine (Fig. 1.16–3). The fourth carbon in the chain (C4) of glutamate resides next to a carboxyl group whose oxygen atoms are highly electrophilic. The nearby oxygen atoms of the carboxyl group draw the electrons at that end of the molecule to themselves, so that the C4 carbon nucleus of glutamate is more exposed to the large magnetic field and therefore has a larger Larmor frequency. Stated differently, the carboxyl group reduces the shielding of the carbon nucleus, slightly modifying the value of B0, and thereby causing the carbon to resonate at a slightly higher frequency. Now consider glutamine, which has only one oxygen near the C4 carbon position, in addition to the nonelectrophilic amide group, and so the electrons more fully shield the glutamine C4 carbon nucleus. The C4 of glutamine resonates at a lower frequency than the C4 carbon of glutamate. 
FIGURE 1.16–3. Neurochemicals differ slightly in the Larmor frequencies of their atoms, according to chemical identity and location within the molecule. The frequencies differ according to their magnetic environment, and an electron cloud provides shielding for the nuclei. In the case of the –CH2– of glutamate whose carbon is numbered 4, adjacent to the carboxyl group, the electrophilic oxygen atoms on the carboxyl group draw the electron cloud toward themselves, leaving the hydrogen nuclei exposed to the large static magnetic field. The nuclei of the corresponding hydrogen atoms in glutamine do not have the adjacent electrophilic oxygen atoms to unshield them and therefore experience a slightly lower magnetic field strength. Therefore, the resonance frequency of glutamate at 1.5 T is about 7 Hz higher than that of glutamine. 

========753========

FIGURE 1.16–4. Effects of chemical shift and J-coupling. Chemicals in MRS studies are identified primarily on the basis of their chemical shifts, but significant information also arises from the J-coupling interaction of spins. A: Lactate has resonances at 4.15 and 1.33 ppm from TSP. The methyl protons are equivalent and are all centered at 1.33 ppm. However, they interact with the adjacent single proton at 4.15 ppm that splits their resonance into a doublet centered at 1.33 ppm. The single proton at 4.15 ppm interacts with all three methyl protons and is split into a quartet. B: Ethanol has a methyl group whose resonance is centered at 1.2 ppm and interacts with an ethylene group whose resonance is centered at 3.7 ppm. The two protons split the methyl resonance into a triplet, while the triple divides the ethylene resonance into a quartet. 
Glutamate and glutamine are also separated in the 
1H 
spectrum. At a magnetic field strength of 1.5 T, the resonances of the two hydrogen nuclei attached to the C4 of glutamate and glutamine are centered 7.7 Hz apart for glutamate relative to glutamine. At 3 T, the same hydrogen nuclei resonate 15.4 Hz apart. At 7 T, they resonate 36 Hz apart, which separates the signals more effectively at the higher magnetic field strength. Because MRS studies are performed across a wide range of magnetic field strengths, 

========754========

some common set of units is used to ease identification of chemicals based on their resonance frequency. The frequency of resonance for nuclei at a particular position in a given molecule is called the chemical shift, and the units are parts per million, or ppm. The notation of ppm is obtained by dividing the frequency difference in hertz by the Larmor frequency in megahertz (i.e., 106 Hz). The result has units of hertz per million hertz, or ppm. In these units, those protons of glutamate and glutamine are said to be centered .11 ppm apart, no matter what the static magnetic field strength. 
Chemical shifts must be seen as relative differences in frequency location. By convention, for 
1H 
and 
13C 
MRS, the field has agreed that the signal from trimethylsilylpropionate (TSP) be designated as the reference compound with a shift of 0 ppm. All other compounds by convention are described by their frequencies relative to that of TSP. For example, lactate has protons that resonate 1.33 and 4.15 ppm away from TSP, respectively (Fig. 1.16–4). For reasons based on the original techniques used to obtain MRS measurements, called swept field NMR, lower chemical shifts are termed upfield, and the higher chemical shifts are called downfield. 
The final influence on the frequency of a nucleus is J-coupling, which is the influence of neighboring nuclei with spin upon one another. The state of the spin of one nucleus exerts a very slight effect on the transition energy of the neighboring spin. To describe J-coupling, a quantum mechanical explanation is necessary. The transition energy is the amount of energy that a spin can absorb and change its energy state, and it is a defined, fixed amount and must be delivered at precisely the Larmor frequency. If one spin is coupled to another, usually through a covalent chemical bond, one spin will change the other’s transition energy to a slightly higher or a slightly lower value. Because the transition energy is ultimately what defines the resonant frequency of a nucleus, half the spins have a slightly higher frequency and half a lower frequency. A nucleus that is affected by one nearby spin, such as the –CH3 group at 1.33 ppm in lactic acid, has a doublet or two resonances instead of one, each representing half of the total resonance for –CH3, as is the case for the methyl group of lactate, in which three identical hydrogen nuclei are affected identically by a single adjacent hydrogen (Fig. 1.16–4A). If nuclei are adjacent to two spins, then their resonance is divided into a triplet, as demonstrated by the spectrum of ethanol (Fig. 1.16–4B). Nuclei adjacent to three spins, such as seen in the hydrogen adjacent to the methyl group of lactic acid, yield a quartet that arises from the effect of the three methyl protons of lactic acid on the single 
1H 
at 4.11 ppm (Fig. 1.16–4A) or the –CH2 protons of ethanol (Fig. 1.16–4B). The spectral distance between each resonance in the multipeak structure is J Hz and is typically reported in hertz, not ppm, because the splitting due to J-coupling is independent of magnetic field 

========755========

strength. For the 
1H–1H 
splitting of Figure 1.16–4, the value of J usually lies between 3 and 15 Hz. 
SYSTEM HARDWARE 
Before moving from the basic physics of MR to methods of MRI and MRS, it is helpful to examine the MR machine itself. MR machines are composed of three or four main components: A magnet, a transmit path, and a receive path, and almost all MR scanners also have gradient coils. The magnet is the source of B0, which is what creates the net magnetization. The transmit path generates the transverse magnetization. The receive path detects the signal from the sample and carries it back to the computer for storage. 
The magnet (Fig. 1.16–5) consists of hundreds of miles of superconducting wire wound in precise formations. When a magnet is installed, a strong vacuum is applied to remove all ambient air and water from around the wire. Then the evacuated container is filled with liquid helium to maintain its superconductivity at a temperature of 4 K, or – 453°F. The helium bath is insulated by a vacuum chamber to reduce boil- off. Liquid helium is expensive, and a recent worldwide shortage is expected to continue for several years, so in many magnets, the helium structure lies within a bath of liquid nitrogen or a refrigeration unit. The helium in the magnet must be maintained at high purity, because humidity or air that enters the helium chamber (called a dewar) will solidify and may create a blockage that can result in an explosion. Another sort of failure is a quench, which is a sudden loss of charge in the electrical windings of the magnet, simultaneously with the almost instantaneous expulsion of helium from the magnet. Such events can be caused by a loss of vacuum around the helium container, a failure to maintain the helium at an adequate level, or the introduction of a ferromagnetic object in the vicinity of the magnet. 
The magnet is constructed with additional circuits called shims, which are used to fine-tune the homogeneity of the magnetic field. The quality of MRI and MRS improves dramatically with the homogeneity of B0. The magnets are designed and built to achieve a homogeneous magnetic field within a sphere in the center of the magnet, but when a magnet is placed in the site where it will operate, the homogeneity is disrupted. Initial adjustments to B0 homogeneity are made using small pieces of metal, called shims, placed strategically at different places in the bore of the magnet in a painstaking process, and then engineers adjust the magnetic field homogeneity further with the shim circuits. Likewise, when a person is placed in the scanner, the homogeneity is altered, and it is necessary to adjust the shim circuits to compensate. For many cases, it is only necessary to apply three linear adjustments to the magnetic field, but for some applications, including MRS, second- or third-order changes must often be 

========756========

applied. 
The transmit path begins with a frequency source whose output is modified to obtain a desired amplitude, phase, and shape. The modulated signal is sent to a radio frequency amplifier to boost the transmission, often into the range of kilovolts. The transmission is directed to the coil that is around the head, where it generates an oscillating magnetic field, which by convention is called B1. 
Part of the transmit path is the radio frequency coil. A typical coil for brain imaging and spectroscopy is shown in Figure 1.16–6. The coil surrounds the brain so that relatively uniform coverage is achieved. Another type of detector, a surface coil, is used for cases in which localized coverage with high sensitivity is required. All coils must be tuned to the Larmor frequency, and to do that, adjustable capacitors form part of the circuit. The coil not only transmits to the brain but also receives the signal from the brain and therefore forms the beginning of the receive path. The signal in the receive coil has an amplitude of microvolts at the Larmor frequency. If it traveled unaltered through many feet of wires to the computers for processing and storage, then the noise that accumulates along its path would overwhelm the signal. Therefore, as close as possible to the coil, magnet-compatible preamplifiers are used to boost the received signal to a level of millivolts. The signal is modified to shift the frequency into the auditory range, covering kilohertz, and stored on a computer. Typical causes of coil failure include a preamplifier damaged by leakage of radio frequency transmission into the receive path or damage to capacitors from power-induced cracking or sparking. Such failures become more likely in a head coil by transmitting high power levels into coils, especially when a sample whose size and conductivity differ significantly from a human head. 

========757========

FIGURE 1.16–5. A whole-body MR scanner. Magnets for MRI are usually cylindrical, with a hole through the middle. The hole accommodates a set of cylindrical gradient coils that are used for shimming and experiments that require spatial information, such as imaging. The gradient coil cylinder has a bore large enough to accommodate a human torso or, in some new models, just a person’s head. A patient bed slides in and out of the scanner. On top of the magnet are vents to allow for boil off of helium and, in many cases, nitrogen gas. There is also an entry point to allow charging of the superconducting windings when the magnet is installed and to allow controlled shut down if the magnet needs to be de-energized after some years of operation. 
FIGURE 1.16–6. A typical coil used for MRI and MRS of the brain. Built for whole-brain 

========758========

coverage, this coil surrounds the head. The ideal would be a long, empty conducting tube, but to accommodate a head, it must be short, and to allow for patient comfort and construction constraints, it must have discrete conducting elements. Four of the elements are housed within the bars that can be seen along the upper part of the coil. The other elements are housed in the bottom section of the coil, beneath where the head rests during a scan. 
Gradient coils form an almost universal fourth component of hardware in an MR scanner. In the absence of gradient coils, MR signals are obtained with little or no information about what part of the sample that they represent. For example, if a standard brain imaging protocol is run without gradient coils, then the result would be an MR spectrum of a large water signal and small fat signal. The X, Y, and Z gradient coils provide the positional information. When current is directed through the X gradient coil, a spatially linear ramp is added to B0, such that B0effective = B0 + Gxx, where Gx is the gradient strength in units of millitesla/centimeter, and x is the distance from the magnet’s center. Similar relationships exist for the Y and Z gradients and the y and z directions in the magnet. When power is applied to the gradients, the Larmor frequency depends linearly on the position within the magnet, and by this encoding images can be obtained. Patients commonly ask the source of the loud noises of an MR scanner, and the answer is the gradient coils. When the current is switched on and off rapidly, it generates a magnetic field that opposes the primary field of the magnet and generates large forces that are manifest as loud noises. Patients may also sense vibrations inside the scanner, from the same cause. 
FOURIER TRANSFORM 
Having examined the basic physics and the MR machine, it is helpful to turn to one of the most basic analytical tools that are used for MR studies. The purpose of this section is to explain and illustrate the relationships between the observed signals and the processed images and spectra of MRI and MRS. The signals are observed over periods of milliseconds, and those time-dependent signals must be transformed into spatial pictures in the case of MRI and spectra in the case of MRS. 
MRS and MRI both make use of a mathematical operation called a Fourier transform, which is used in a many fields to switch between time and temporal frequency (e.g., seconds and hertz) or between space and k- space (centimeters and reciprocal centimeters). Every time-dependent signal can be represented as a set of frequencies, measured in hertz, and every object can be expressed as a set of signals in k-space. The idea behind Fourier transforms is that any shape can be created by adding the right frequencies and amplitudes of sinusoidal signals together. Figure 1.16–7 shows the decomposition and recreation of a profile of the Taj Mahal in India. The Fourier transformation at the upper right is plotted as a histogram of weightings associated with the range of frequencies that make 

========759========

up the profile, with low frequencies in the center of the graph and higher frequencies to either side. The panels at the center left show that the contributions of the lowest frequencies to the profile have to do with large features. From the low frequencies, one can see that the profile has a large object in the middle and something large on either side, but there is little detail. The next panels to the right show the effects of adding progressively higher frequencies, which gradually produces the finer features. That is because the higher-frequency components of the Fourier transform contain the details of a signal. When all of the frequencies are included, the original image is obtained. The Taj Mahal is built from sine waves. 
Aside from its appearance in dreams, the Taj Mahal may have little to do with psychiatric brain imaging, but it illustrates fundamentals of the Fourier transform. Signals in MRS are acquired as a function of time, just as one can record sounds as time-dependent vibrations (Fig. 1.16–8A). The Fourier transform of the sounds reveals the frequencies and volumes of sound that comprise a note, just as the Fourier transform of an MRS signal reveals the frequencies and amplitudes of signals that uniquely identify neurochemicals that make up the FID (Fig. 1.16–8B). The MR signals in brain imaging are acquired in the k-space domain and undergo Fourier transformation to generate the standard anatomic pictures. Low-frequency data are those that reside near the center of k-space, and just as for the picture of the Taj Mahal, the data that reside near the center of k-space lack details but indicate primarily how large the head is and that the shape is roughly circular. The information about sulci and other fine details are found farther from the center of k-space (Fig. 1.16–9). Schemes exist to acquire only the center or the outer edges of k-space to save time in cases that do not require all of the information about the image, but the great majority of brain imaging is done with standard coverage of k-space. 

========760========

FIGURE 1.16–7. The Fourier transform is based on the premise that the shape of any object can be created with the right combination of sinusoidal waves. In this example, a profile of the Taj Mahal is shown at the upper left, and its Fourier transform is shown at the right. If the center group of frequencies, labeled a, are plotted and summed (two center left panels), then a general shape of the profile is achieved. If the next group of frequencies, labeled b, are plotted and added (two middle panels), then the shape of the center dome begins to take shape. The next band of frequencies, labeled c, can be included (right center panels) to show the presence of the pairs of towers on each side of the central dome. When all frequencies are included, the original picture is seen (bottom). Two principles are shown by this example: An object can be expressed as a series of sinusoids, and the details of an object lie primarily with the frequencies that lie farthest from zero. 
MRI METHODOLOGY 
MRI methodology is about seeing boundaries and differences in tissue composition. That requires the generation of image contrast. The word “contrast” is often used clinically to mean an injectable contrast agent, but the general meaning of contrast in MRI is anything that differentiates the appearance of one material from another. To that end, contrast in brain imaging is obtained by exploitation of differences in T1, T2, blood oxygenation, diffusion coefficient, and concentration of water or fat. The most basic neuropsychiatric application of MRI is the mapping of brain anatomy, and this is generally done on the basis of the natural contrast from T1, T2, and T2* of brain water. On the side of clinical applications, the purpose is often to check for particular causes of symptoms, such as tumors 

========761========

or multiple sclerosis. All image sequences consist of one or more region- specific radio frequency excitations followed by applications of gradients to scan k-space. The resulting k-space distributions undergo Fourier transformation to create images. By convention, MRI results are displayed such that the bottom of sagittal or coronal images points toward the feet and the right side of axial or coronal images points toward the patient’s left. 
The most basic MRI sequences are called gradient-echo and spin-echo. The gradient-echo sequence is simply an excitation pulse in conjunction with gradients to localize the sources of the signals (Fig. 1.16–10). For each slice, the measurement consists of a slice-selective excitation pulse applied, while a slice-selection gradient is applied. The longer the pulse and the stronger the gradient, the thinner the slice will be; scanners equipped with stronger gradients are generally able to provide thinner slices. A phase- encoding gradient is then applied perpendicular to the slice selection, in one of the in-plane dimensions, to shift the acquisition to a fixed distance in k-space; larger phase-encoding gradients shift the acquisition farther in k-space. After the phase-encoding gradient, a preparatory gradient is applied in the second in-plane dimension to shift the acquisition in the second dimension of k-space. Finally, a read gradient is applied in that second dimension of k-space. The process is repeated, using a slightly different phase-encoding gradient strength each time to provide appropriate coverage of two dimensions of k-space, allowing the generation of two-dimensional image. 

========762========

FIGURE 1.16–8. The Fourier transform allows time-dependent signals to be expressed in terms of frequency, and in this respect MRI is indistinguishable from sounds. A: The upper graph shows the sound of a note played on a saxophone and cymbal by the author’s daughter and son. Fourier transformation reveals some of the frequencies that are generated from the instruments. The richness of the sound of a saxophone derives largely from the combination of frequencies and various amplitudes of tones that it emits, and the cymbal’s characteristic sound derives from the multitude of frequencies in addition to its primary pitch at 540 Hz. B: The MRS signal, viewed relative to the Larmor frequency, is indistinguishable from sound; the MRS signal also appears as a time-dependent oscillation. Some early MR scanners were connected to audio speakers to allow the operators to make quick evaluations of signal quality. In this case, the Fourier transform converts a complicated time-domain measurement into a spectrum with easily identifiable features that are typical for a sample of healthy brain tissue. The volume contains N-acetylaspartate (NAA), creatine + phosphocreatine (Cr + PCr), myo-inositol (MI), choline, scyllo-inositol (SI), glutamate (Glu), and glutamine (Gln). 

========763========

FIGURE 1.16–9. K-space data (top) paired with associated images (bottom). Typical k- space coverage is uniform and yields a standard brain image (left pair). If only the center of k-space is acquired (center pair), then the image loses much of its detail, which is analogous to the example of the reconstruction of the profile of the Taj Mahal in the earlier example. If only the outer regions of k-space are acquired (right pair), then only the fine details remain. 
FIGURE 1.16–10. Coverage of k-space for brain imaging. A: The gradient-echo sequence is a pulse-acquire measurement that includes gradients to localize the signal. (1) A slice-selection gradient is applied with a frequency-selective pulse to excite the magnetization in a slice. (2) The slice selection gradient disperses the magnetization, so a slice refocus gradient is applied to refocus it before the acquisition. (3) Phase encode gradients move the magnetization in the phase encode direction. (4) A read rephase gradient opposite to the read gradient is applied to move to one edge of k-space. (5) A read gradient moves the signal through k-space in the read direction. B: The k-space data are shown at left, with indications of the path that was covered by the read and phase- encoding gradients. Transformation of the k-space data results in the image shown at the right. 
T1 Weighting, Injected Contrast Agents, and T2 Weighting 
T1-based contrast exploits the different rates of realignment of spins with the static magnetic field. T1 weighting is exploited in different ways, 

========764========

including injections of exogenous agents, but a common noninvasive approach is inversion recovery (IR), with timing set to null, or blacken, regions of the image with the long T1 of CSF. IR imaging works on the principle that the detectible XY magnetization can only be created from Z magnetization, which means that elimination of Z magnetization in the CSF will eliminate the source of the signal in areas that contain CSF. When a 180-degree pulse is applied to the magnetization, the net magnetization is inverted, and it immediately begins to return to the alignment with the magnetic field. The T1 of white matter is the smallest, so the magnetization in white matter recovers first. The T1 of CSF is longest, so its magnetization recovers most slowly, and if the images are acquired near the point at which its Z magnetization reaches 0, the CSF will appear black in the images. The gray matter has an intermediate T1, so its value will be recovered enough to detect but not as much as that of white matter: Gray matter will appear significantly darker than white matter. Figure 1.16–9 shows such an image. T1-weighted images are commonly used for structural analysis, including volumetric research. 
Another way to obtain T1-based contrast is with the use of an injectable agent, most of which contain gadolinium. The contrast agents pass through the blood but do not cross the healthy BBB. The gadolinium that is trapped in the molecule decreases the T1 of the hydrogen nuclei in the water around it and brightens the image intensity wherever it appears. In cases in which the BBB has been disrupted, as is the case with some tumors, the gadolinium agent enters the abnormal tissue easily, and the region appears bright in the images (Fig. 1.16–11). 
Losses of signal due to the T2 decay of the water signal can be used to highlight CSF relative to white matter and gray matter, which lose signal significantly more quickly during echo delays. A T2-weighted image typically uses a spin-echo type of image, which combines an excitation pulse to create XY magnetization and then one or more 180-degree pulses to track the T2 decay that progresses with time after the excitation pulse. In the case of multiple sclerosis (Fig. 1.16–12), the fluid in pockets within the ventricles, sulci, and lesions has longer T2 values than the other tissue. If a long echo delay is used, then the signals from gray and white matter decay to 50 percent or less of their maximum values, while the signal from the fluid remains strong. 
One disadvantage of T2-weighted images is the poor contrast between gray and white matter. However, an advantage is that the types of image sequences used for T2-weighting typically eliminate inhomogeneity-related signal loss, called T2*-loss, that typically darkens images near the ear canals and sinuses. The sequences employed for T2 weighting avoid this behavior. 

========765========

FIGURE 1.16–11. Acoustic schwannoma in the left cerebellar–pontine angle. The T1- weighted image before the injection of the contrast agent (left) demonstrates a mass in the left cerebellar–pontine angle. After administration of the gadolinium contrast agent (right), blood vessels are highlighted, and because the tumor is not protected by the blood–brain barrier, the mass is more clearly characterized as being partially cystic. There is enhancement in the internal auditory canal (arrow), which is consistent with an acoustic schwannoma. (Courtesy of Robert Fulbright, M.D., Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University.) 
FIGURE 1.16–12. Multiple sclerosis (MS) in periventricular regions. Left: A fast spin- echo image enhances materials with large values of T2, including cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) in the sulci and the ventricles. The MS lesions are enhanced, but it is difficult to differentiate them from the normal CSF. The periventricular MS lesions have T1 values that are significantly lower than the value for CSF, so T1 weighting can be used to differentiate the lesions from fluid. Right: The lesions are more conspicuous with the fast spin-echo, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image (FLAIR) image. The FLAIR sequence incorporates 

========766========

an inversion-recovery pulse that uses T1 relaxation to suppress signal from the CSF, making it easier to detect lesions that are adjacent to CSF spaces. (Courtesy of Robert Fulbright, M.D., Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University.) 
Most MR images are acquired to evaluate structure. A treating physician may be interested in checking for tumors or multiple sclerosis, as already demonstrated in Figures 1.16–11 and 1.16–12. Other common clinical purposes are the detection of atrophy or cerebral malformations. An area of structural MRI that may move beyond its current status as a research tool is volumetric analysis (Fig. 1.16–13). A variety of approaches exist, both manual and automated, but their purpose is to measure the volumes of brain regions, often with separate quantification of white matter and cortical tissue. The specific goal of the research is usually to characterize particular populations of patients with respect to the volumes of various brain structures, commonly the frontal lobe, the hippocampus, or the corpus callosum. 
Diffusion MRI 
The diffusivity of water can provide a mechanism of contrast for MRI. The most common form, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), reduces the signal in each image pixel based on the diffusivity of water. The process by which the signal is reduced is similar to that of T2* decay: Gradients are used as an artificial source of T2* with a strong spatial dependence. A spin-echo- type sequence is applied with the diffusion gradients on each side of the refocusing pulse. Nuclei that diffuse very little between the gradients experience the same magnetic field strength and are refocused by the spin- echo, but nuclei that diffuse appreciably along the direction of the gradient experience two different magnetic fields and are incompletely refocused, yielding less signal than is seen for the stationary nuclei. DWI can reveal abnormalities in otherwise normal-appearing tissue, as in regions of edema that surround a cerebral infarct. Regions with edema show greater signal reductions, because water can diffuse more readily when the tissue structure is disrupted and filled with more fluid. 

========767========

FIGURE 1.16–13. Structural T1-weighted image that has been segmented by brain region for volumetric analysis in a group of patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. In this study, sets of contiguous slices were acquired to cover the entire brain, and then anatomic landmarks were used to demarcate brain regions. (Courtesy of Andrea Jackowski, Ph.D., Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil, and Joan Kaufman, Ph.D., Yale University.) 
Water does not diffuse equally in all directions in the brain, because the microenvironment restricts the mobility of water. For example, in white matter, water diffuses much more easily along the length of the fiber tracts than across them. That means that fiber tracts that run in the same direction as the diffusion gradient will show a greater signal reduction than fibers that run perpendicular to the orientation of the diffusion gradient. Application of diffusion gradients in six or more different orientations allows the directionality of the diffusion of the water, the diffusion tensor, to be measured for every image pixel, generating diffusion tensor images (DTIs). Measurement of the orientation of water diffusion permits a measurement of fractional anisotropy, which provides a measure of the randomness of tissue structure. For example, if tissue is highly ordered, then the diffusion of water will be restricted and more oriented than is the case for tissue that is disordered. A more calculation-intensive use of DTIs comes from following the diffusion tensors through chains of pixels to track fibers. Fiber tracking allows detailed analyses of anatomic connectivity (Fig. 1.16–14), which holds great potential clinically but for now remains a research tool. 

========768========

FIGURE 1.16–14. Fiber tracks determined from DTI, presented in an axial perspective. The diffusion tensor was mapped by the acquisition of images with diffusion weighting in multiple directions. A numerical integration technique followed the principal direction of diffusivity from pixel to pixel and slice to slice to track fibers through the brain. (Courtesy of Marcel Jackowski, Ph.D., Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil, and Todd Constable, Ph.D., Yale University.) 
Imaging Blood Flow 
MRI is used clinically to image blood flow in the head. A physician may need to differentiate between a degenerative disorder and a compromised blood supply for a region of the brain. For that purpose, MR angiography (MRA) and perfusion MRI can provide helpful information. The example of Figure 1.16–15 shows time-of-flight angiography, which uses a gradient- echo measurement to make images in which inflowing water has more magnetization than stationary spins and thereby appears brighter than the surrounding tissue. Another approach to image perfusion is to use an injection of an intravascular contrast agent that enhances the T1 relaxation and increases the signal on a T1-weighted MRI. A T1-weighted MRI is 

========769========

obtained without the agent and then with the agent, and the image pixels that are associated with flowing blood will be brighter with the contrast agent. 
Another approach is arterial spin labeling (ASL), which is based on the manipulation of nuclei in water outside an image slice and the detection of changes in image intensity as those nuclei arrive in the slice of interest. One approach is to acquire two images, one a baseline image and the other identical but for the application of an inversion pulse (spin tagging) to generate negative magnetization in the water in a slab of the neck, including any water that happens to be flowing up the arteries when the inversion pulse is applied. If images are acquired through slices of the brain, then any of the water that flows with the blood, up from the neck, will have a negative signal. Upon subtraction of the pair of images from one another, pixels that represent static brain water will approach zero, but pixels that lie in the path of blood flow will appear up to twice as bright as those in the baseline image. In this way, blood flow can be mapped without injection of a contrast agent. 
APPLICATIONS OF STRUCTURAL IMAGING TO PSYCHIATRY 
To date, the clinical utility of structural imaging in psychiatry has been limited to ruling out organic brain diseases. However, the methodology has provided information that has helped to shape many of the current theories related to the pathophysiological mechanisms associated with several psychiatric disorders, suggesting that both neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative abnormalities are associated with the various disorders. The use of imaging to contribute to the understanding of disease forms a key part of the RDoC criteria of NIH. Recent advances in the methodology now provide promise that the technique may soon find clinical utility in the diagnosis and prognosis of some psychiatric disorders. 
MRI Applications to Dementia 
The diagnosis of dementia comprises several illnesses that are characterized by memory loss and other cognitive disturbances. The most common illness associated with dementia is Alzheimer disease, which is characterized by the presence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in several cortical and subcortical limbic regions. The disease is associated with neuronal and glial pathology, as well as global and regional brain atrophy and loss of gray matter. Structural imaging is now beginning to emerge as a clinically relevant component of Alzheimer disease diagnosis. Although the current diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer disease used by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke— Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders and Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition, text revision (DSM IV-TR) do 

========770========

not consider MRI data in the diagnostic process, a recent position paper published on the basis of an international conference held to reevaluate the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke—Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders diagnostic criteria suggested that MRI be used diagnostically as a supportive feature in the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease. 
FIGURE 1.16–15.Imagingvasculaturebytime-of-flight(TOF)angiography.Left:Images are acquired with rapid repetitions that saturate the signal from nonvascular nuclei, thereby reducing the signals from tissues other than flowing blood. Right: After being processed to select image regions that show enhanced signal intensity, flowing blood is identified. 
Several MRI changes including increased numbers of subcortical hyperintensities, generalized atrophy, and ventricular enlargement are associated with normal aging. However, it is well established that some changes seem more specific to the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease and may be clinically useful in formulating the diagnosis and prognosis of the disorder. MRI evidence of MTL atrophy appears to be most closely associated with the disorder. MTL atrophy is extremely common in individuals with Alzheimer disease with rates reported to be between 71 and 96 percent depending on disease severity. MTL atrophy is often observed in the early stages of MCI, making it potentially useful as a prognostic tool. However, the sensitivity and specificity associated with the current MRI methodology limit its clinical usefulness in prognostic imaging. One approach that may help to improve the clinical utility of MRI in the diagnosis and prognosis of Alzheimer disease and other forms of dementia is to follow the rate of change in brain structures over time. Longitudinal follow-up studies have shown the rates of volume loss to be significantly greater in subjects with prodromal Alzheimer disease (up to 5 percent brain volume/year) compared to those experiencing normal age- 

========771========

related reductions (0.1 percent brain volume/year). Other methodological advances are also in development that may help to improve the clinical utility of MRI in the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease. Methods providing an improved ability to rapidly and reliably assess the volumes of specific subregions of the MTL such as the hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex provide some promise. Several recent studies suggest hippocampal volume loss determined by MRI volumetric analyses in subjects with MCI is capable of predicting conversion to Alzheimer disease in the subsequent years. Further advances in the ability to assess the specific subfields of these regions could lead to dramatic improvements in the specificity and sensitivity of the studies. Examples of these methods include voxel-based morphometry, an image analysis technique that can simultaneously identify multiple areas of cortical and subcortical degeneration, and surface mapping techniques that use specific cortical features as constraints to guide the matching of anatomy across subjects to provide information on cortical gray matter thickness for specific brain regions. All of these techniques are aided in part by the development of what are today considered high-field (3 to 4 T) and ultrahigh-field magnets (7 T and above). The possibility of increasing accuracy by the addition of other measures like FDG-PET is showing promise. Although these techniques were originally developed for neuroscience research, their potential clinical relevance is becoming appreciated in providing increased structural resolution and even the potential application of imaging microscopy. 
DTI studies have identified significant frontal, temporal, and parietal white matter diffusion tensor changes in MCI and Alzheimer disease patients that appear to correlate with cognitive functioning. Other recent studies have also found relevant microstructural changes in the normal- appearing white matter of patients with Alzheimer disease and MCI, although fractional anisotropy may not be particularly sensitive to the disorder. The changes are consistent with a hypothesized loss of axonal processes in the frontal and temporal regions in Alzheimer disease. 
MRI Applications to Schizophrenia 
Structural neuroimaging studies have provided some of the most important evidence of abnormal cortical development in patients with schizophrenia. Initial studies reported consistent cerebroventriculomegaly, reductions in total cortical volumes, and regional volumetric deficits, particularly in frontal and temporal cortical regions. One consistent exception to this rule was the striatum where treatment with typical antipsychotics produces increased volume in patients compared to healthy subjects or never- medicated patients. With the application of segmentation techniques to separate cortical gray and white matter within MR images, it became clear that both tissue compartments showed regional deficiencies in patients. The application of more recent techniques have enabled investigators to 

========772========

describe abnormal patterns of cortical gyrification, curvature, and reduced cortical thickness in patients, although to date, abnormalities are insufficient to discriminate patients from healthy comparison subjects on an individual basis. 
Structural MRI also has been useful for characterizing features of the heritable risk for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia is associated with a heritability estimate of 70 to 90 percent. Consistent with this view, family members of individuals with schizophrenia show a pattern of reductions in cortical gray and white matter volume that resembles, but is milder than, that associated with schizophrenia. Further, among healthy individuals and patients diagnosed with schizophrenia, risk genes (COMT, PRODH, NRG1, DISC1, and GAD1) appear to influence MRI findings. One special case, velocardiofacial syndrome (DiGeorge syndrome, 22q11 deletion), is associated with structural MRI, functional MRI (fMRI), and clinical features of schizophrenia. 
Structural MRI also has provided some insights into the progressive course of this disorder and the impact of antipsychotic treatment. The most striking findings have been in childhood onset schizophrenia, where a series of neuroimaging studies using a variety of MRI approaches including specified regions of interest, automated voxel-based morphological analysis, and deformation analysis (an extremely sensitive approach for measuring within-subject change) have clearly shown that the development and evolution of schizophrenia are associated with a progressive deviation of regional cortical volumes from those of healthy comparison populations. A surprising finding from these longitudinal studies has been the prominent involvement of posterior cortical structures, including primary and secondary sensory cortices, relatively early in the course of schizophrenia associated with a wave-like progressive emergence of deficits in additional regions that advances anteriorly as the disease advances. This pattern of progression mirrors the development of the cortex and, as a result, would seem to support a disturbance in the development of the cortex. In adolescents and young adults who manifest symptoms of the schizophrenia prodrome, “ultra high risk” state, or who are in their first episode of schizophrenia, many of the changes associated with chronic schizophrenia are already present. Despite earlier data to the contrary from computed tomography (CT) imaging, there are now a growing number of studies in adults with chronic schizophrenia that indicate that even at this stage of the disorder there is subtle but progressive cortical gray and white matter volume loss in a number of cortical regions, relative to time- dependent volumetric reductions in age-matched healthy subjects. In an era where nearly all patients with schizophrenia receive some degree of pharmacotherapy, studies face the challenge of distinguishing the long- term trajectory of cortical volume changes associated with the illness from the long-term effects of antipsychotics that might emerge over decades of 

========773========

treatment. In this regard, it is interesting to note that some data suggest the possibility that treatment with some “second generation” or “atypical” antipsychotic medications may reduce the short-term, that is, 1 to 2 years, progression of cortical volume reductions or the typical antipsychotic treatment-related increase in basal ganglia volume in patients with schizophrenia. There is hope that these types of studies might reveal neuroprotective effects of future pharmacotherapies for schizophrenia. 
DTI has been employed in a growing number of studies that have attempted to characterize disturbances in the organization and integrity of many major white matter pathways associated with schizophrenia. Because DTI measures the movement of water molecules, it is particularly sensitive to the constraining effects of neural projections and their associated glial sheaths upon the normally random diffusion of water as well as the impact of disturbances in neural and glial integrity. DTI findings in schizophrenia include (1) abnormalities in the degree of anisotropy (lack of organization in the direction that water molecules move within a given voxel), presumably reflecting altered integrity or degree of branching of cortical white matter pathways, (2) reduced total diffusivity (total water movement within a given voxel), a dependent measure related to anisotropy and related to integrity of white matter pathways, and (3) reduced size, integrity, or branchedness of specific white matter pathways identified using DTI tractography. Using standard techniques one cannot differentiate the contributions of local dendritic fields, local axonal pathways, and converging inputs from distant neurons. 
MR-based perfusion studies have begun to complement other techniques, principally PET and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) in describing cortical perfusion deficits associated with schizophrenia. An early generation of PET studies of perfusion and metabolism deficits associated with schizophrenia yielded the impression that schizophrenia was associated with resting “hypofrontality,” that is, a relative deficit in the metabolism or perfusion of the frontal cortical structures. However, careful review of this first generation of studies did not yield a firm conclusion of the nature and or validity of resting hypofrontality associated with schizophrenia. More recently, PET, SPECT, and MR-based perfusion studies have been used to characterize task- related alterations in regional cortical perfusion associated with schizophrenia. The novel opportunity provided by MR-based perfusion studies, largely unrealized, is to take advantage of the potential for absolute perfusion quantification in order to reduce interpretation errors when comparing across subjects or across test days where there might be baseline differences that cannot be appreciated using semiquantitative imaging techniques, such as Echo-Planar Imaging (EPI) with Blood- Oxygen Level-Dependent (BOLD) contrast. Studies of cortical perfusion in schizophrenia have been useful to help to evaluate the potential direct 

========774========

vascular effects of substances that might also be of interest with respect to their modulation of neural and glial function, as in the case of nicotine. 
MRI Applications to Mood Disorders 
Older MRI studies evaluating larger brain regions have yielded few replicable findings related to mood disorders beyond vague reports of lateral ventriculomegaly. However, more recent findings examining specific subregions of the brain have yielded interesting and replicable findings of smaller volumes in several brain regions including of the basal ganglia, thalamus, hippocampus, frontal lobe, orbitofrontal cortex, and gyrus rectus. Perhaps MRI’s greatest contribution to the field of mood disorders research comes from the studies demonstrating reduced hippocampal volume in individuals suffering from MDD. Hippocampal volumetrics have been studied in several neuropsychiatric disorders. Reduced hippocampal volumes have been reported in epilepsy, Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, Cushing disease, and Alzheimer disease, traumatic brain disorder as well as alcoholism, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and schizophrenia. Despite the confounds introduced by study heterogeneity (age, gender, duration of illness, and responsiveness to treatment) that characterizes the studies in MDD, a 2004 meta-analysis of 12 MRI studies revealed a significant reduction in hippocampal volume in both hemispheres of individuals with MDD. Average reductions of 8 percent on the left and 10 percent on the right were reported. Other evidence suggests that the total number of episodes, duration of illness, and exposure to childhood abuse may further contribute to the degree of volume reduction associated with MDD. This data has been taken as strong support for a model of stress-induced hippocampal toxicity involving glucocorticoid receptor activation, hypoxia, and elevated levels of glutamate neurotransmission. However, recent studies also suggest that pediatric patients with familial depression also have reduced hippocampal volumes, suggesting that reduced hippocampal volume may be suggestive of a risk factor for developing MDD. 
The anterior cingulate gyrus is another region that has gained much attention due to findings of significant abnormalities associated with mood disorders. Structural MRI has in one study demonstrated reductions of 39 and 48 percent in the mean gray matter volume in the prefrontal cortex ventral to the genu of the corpus callosum in both familial bipolar depressives and familial unipolar depressives. Although this finding has not been replicated consistently in later structural imaging studies, functional imaging studies have consistently found abnormalities in this brain region, and histological studies have further identified significant glial cell reductions in this area. 
Patterns of structural abnormalities in neural regions, including the hippocampus and anterior cingulated gyrus, supporting emotion 

========775========

processing were recently found to differentiate MDD and BPD suggesting a multivariate pattern classification techniques may hold promise as future diagnostic aids. Similar to the case in dementia, future studies using higher field strengths and other methods to allow for improved measures of hippocampal subfields are likely to provide marked advantages over the currently used methods. 
Findings remain inconclusive with regard to the amygdala for which several studies have reported no relationship between amygdala volume and mood disorders, while other studies have found either an increase or a decrease in amygdala volumes in mood disorder subjects compared with those of healthy control subjects. Other studies have attempted to define morphometric abnormalities in the basal ganglia related to mood disorders. While there is some evidence suggesting a possible decrease in basal ganglia volume associated with MDD and a potential increase associated with BPD, in general the data remain inconclusive. Recent advances with high-field magnets such as 7 T may clarify the disparate results, possibly even providing a way to differentiate bipolar psychosis from schizophrenia. 
In the area of late-life depression, structural MRI findings have had a large impact on guiding the direction of research. White matter hyperintensities (WMHs) are areas of increased signal intensity that are particularly apparent on T2-weighted images. As mentioned above, they are commonly associated with aging and are thought to reflect diverse neuropathological underpinnings related to ischemia, hypertension, myelin pallor, inflammatory disease, amyloidosis, and other causes. WMHs are considered important markers in the study of the consequences of vascular risk factors on the brain and are commonly interpreted as a hallmark of chronic cerebral ischemia. The consistent findings of significantly increased numbers of WMHs in individuals with late-life depression, especially late onset depression, suggest an etiologically different subtype of MDD. These findings have fueled the cerebrovascular hypothesis of late-life depression that posits that white matter lesions resulting from cerebrovascular disease disrupt fiber tracks within the frontostriatal circuitry. 
Recent studies suggest that white matter changes predate the development of late onset depression and that the severity of the changes predicted subsequent depressive symptoms in the following year even after controlling for age, baseline cognitive function, and depressive symptoms. This adds support to the claim of a causative relationship, but it remains to be determined how important the location and lateralization of the actual WMHs are to the pathogenesis of late-life depression or whether they are merely a marker of a progressing of vascular disease. Future standardized and automated grading systems of WMH, currently in development, should greatly facilitate the use of this modality in clinical practice. 

========776========

MRI Applications to Alcohol Dependence 
MRI studies have been the principal tool to describe in vivo the many sources of neurotoxicity associated with alcoholism including (1) the direct neurotoxic and gliotoxic effects of ethanol, (2) the neurotoxic effects of poor nutrition that often accompany the abuse of alcohol, (3) the excitotoxicity associated with the ethanol withdrawal state, and (4) the possible disruption in adult-neurogenesis–associated ethanol intoxication and withdrawal. These studies documented a striking age dependence of the overall neurotoxicity associated with alcoholism. Alcohol dependence in adolescents has been associated with pronounced and lasting reductions in cortical volume, suggesting a disruption of a neurodevelopmental process associated with the familial risk for alcoholism or exposure to alcohol. In healthy young adults, careful studies suggest that there are relatively subtle neurotoxic effects of ethanol that may not be present in most heavy drinkers. However, with the onset of “middle age” and progressively thereafter, coincident with increasing cumulative exposure to alcohol and bouts of alcohol withdrawal, there appears to be a progressive sensitivity to alcohol-related neurotoxicity. This toxicity is reflected as loss of both gray and white matter, and these losses appear to be related to cognitive impairments. Gray matter microstructure has been reported to change first, and the damage is more severe in those who drink early, possibly because early heavy drinkers often proceed to heavier drinking than people who begin drinking at a later age. DTI studies provide evidence of disturbance in the integrity of white matter tracks associated with alcoholism. The volumetric changes are particularly severe in patients with Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome, arising from nutritional deficiency. Generally, there is gradual and partial recovery of volume loss with extended sobriety, that is, a more rapid phase of volume restoration over several months with some continued recovery over several years. White matter shows evidence of earlier recovery than gray matter, although relapse leads to accelerated white matter damage. Structural MRI research has disproven an early hypothesis that the brain volumetric changes associated with alcohol dependence and the initiation of sobriety reflect the dehydration and rehydration of the brain, respectively. 
FUNCTIONAL MRI METHODOLOGY 
Brain function consumes energy, which is supplied by blood flow to carry oxygen and nutrients to the tissue. Changes in brain function lead to alterations in hemodynamics and blood oxygenation, and such changes affect the magnetization that is detected by MRI. The effects are mediated through the magnetic susceptibilities of oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin, working through local T2* effects. Deoxygenated hemoglobin perturbs the magnetic field homogeneity in its vicinity, while oxygenated 

========777========

hemoglobin does not. When the level of deoxyhemoglobin increases, the signal in the vicinity of the blood decreases and lower deoxyhemoglobin leads to larger signals around blood vessels. This leads to the phenomenon of BOLD contrast. Sets of images are acquired under two or more conditions, using different functional or pharmacologic challenges, in which case the technique is sometimes called phMRI, and changes in brain function are detected as increased or decreased image intensity (Fig. 1.16– 16). 
FIGURE 1.16–16. Functional MRI at 3 T during right-hand movement, with sagittal (left), coronal (center), and axial (right) views. The T1-weighted image forms the base of the display for anatomic identification. A series of images were acquired with the hand alternating between stationary and moving conditions, and then the groups of images were compared to identify regions that showed statistically significant changes in signal during hand motion. The left motor cortex showed activation, with regions of most intense change highlighted. 
Because brain function is linked to hemodynamics and the extraction of oxygen from the blood, the level of oxygenated hemoglobin depends on brain function. Paradoxically, when brain activity increases, the fraction of deoxygenated hemoglobin falls because blood flow increases so dramatically that it overcomes the extraction, and the MR signal in the vicinity of the blood vessel rises. Therefore, if MRI data are acquired in one condition, and then while the patient is performing some cognitive task that increases the oxygen extraction in Area 9, for example, the signal in Area 9 will be higher, with an increase typically on the order of 1 or less. If a cognitive task is selected that instead decreases the utilization of Area 9, then the second image will be darker by a small percentage in Area 9. 
Although fMRI is often said simply to reflect blood oxygenation and/or blood flow, the contrast in fMRI depends on a variety of sources that vary in their degrees of specificity. The mechanisms depend on the diameter of the blood vessels, the blood volume, the rate of blood flow, the amount of deoxygenated hemoglobin in the blood, the strength of the magnet used for the scans, and the method of MRI acquisition. For blood vessels that are larger than 20 μm, it is the static dephasing that dominates the signal reduction from deoxygenated hemoglobin. The static dephasing results 

========778========

from the proximity of deoxyhemoglobin in water in the tissue around a blood vessel, and it can be eliminated with a refocusing pulse in a spin- echo-type MRI sequence. For capillary beds and other small blood vessels, the dominant mechanism is intravascular dynamic dephasing and extravascular dynamic dephasing, which occur when water molecules wander randomly through the area of distorted magnetic field that surrounds the deoxyhemoglobin. Although intravascular dynamic dephasing provides information about activation, it yields signals that are not always located at the site of activation. The intravascular dynamic dephasing dominates the BOLD response at 1.5 T but exerts progressively smaller effects as field strengths rise. At high magnetic fields such as 7 T, there is a negligible contribution from intravascular dynamic dephasing. The degree of signal change from these mechanisms is also influenced by the orientation of each blood vessel with respect to the static magnetic field B0. The random orientations in capillary beds yield random shifts in B0 that, once averaged, reduce the signal in a particular image pixel. Larger vessels exert a net change in phase that will also reduce the signal but will do so in an orientation-dependent manner. A change in oxygenation in a large vessel that flows straight across the thickness of a slice will yield an fMRI change that differs from that of a vessel of the same size that flows along the plane of the slice: A different slice orientation can yield a different degree of fMRI signal change even with the same functional task. 
Another mechanism of contrast in fMRI is inflow. During an fMRI study, the nuclei in each image slice are repeatedly excited, and the repeated excitations lead to saturation. That is, the observed signal from a series of rapid scans is smaller because too little time is allowed for full T1 relaxation to the maximum Z magnetization. The saturation only occurs for nuclei that have been excited, which are those that are in the slice and remain in the slice. Nuclei that are carried into the slice by blood flow between the scans have experienced no saturation and therefore have greater Z magnetization. They contribute more Z magnetization per unit volume than their resident counterparts. The more saturated the magnetization within the slice, the greater the impact of inflow contrast will be. Inflow contrast is greater when faster scan repetitions and larger slice excitation angles are used. If the blood flow increases, then the spins that arrive will be less influenced by the slice excitation, so increased blood flow contributes greater signal to the fMRI scan. Any influence that increases blood flow will increase the signal intensity from blood vessels, which may or may not lie in a region of activated tissue, so the inflow contrast contributes nonspecific changes to the fMRI maps. 
Once the fMRI signal changes have been evaluated, an additional factor must be considered: The meaning of the baseline image. A healthy adult might show an increase of 1 percent of signal amplitude in the DLPFC while performing a memory task, while a patient shows a 2 percent rise in the 

========779========

same region for the same task. In both cases, the baseline activity of the neurons is significant with respect to a variety of pertinent parameters, including electroencephalography (EEG), perfusion, and metabolic measurements (Fig. 1.16–17). One interpretation is that the patient’s neural circuitry functions less efficiently and requires more energy to do the same work. An equally viable explanation is that the patient had less baseline activity than the healthy individual, but that when the task began, the same region in the patient’s DLPFC behaved normally and used a similar amount of energy. In both cases, an abnormality has been identified, but the understanding of the underlying pathology differs with the interpretation. When the challenge is pharmacologic, an additional layer of complexity should be considered: The potential influences of the drug, like acute or chronic tobacco use or heavy drinking on the cerebral vasculature, are independent of the functional demands of the tissue. 
Taken together, the numerous mechanisms of contrast show that fMRI maps must be considered with respect to their method of acquisition, slice orientation, magnetic field strength, and pharmacologic influence on the cerebral vascular system. The various sources of contrast must be considered when evaluating the meaning and quantity of change that is observed. 
FIGURE 1.16–17.Relativechangesofbrainenergyutilizationwhenchangingfunctional state and their impact on fMRI. The baseline state in the awake human corresponds to a high level of neuronal activity, blood flow, and metabolism. Changes in brain function are typically represented by small changes in brain energy utilization and, as a result, small changes in fMRI image amplitudes. Because fMRI reflects conditions relative to a large baseline, the interpretation of fMRI responses should consider baseline conditions. Left: The patient has a higher baseline activity than the control subject, and when the functional task shifts both to the same energetic condition, the patient shows a smaller fMRI response than the control subject. Right: The patient and the control subject have the same baseline energy utilization, but the control subject increases energy consumption more than the patient, such that in this case also, the patient has a smaller fMRI response than the control subject. Other factors that may lead to ambiguities are differences in cerebral vascular coupling to energy demand, due to disease or the pharmaceutical interventions. 

========780========

APPLICATIONS OF fMRI IN PSYCHIATRY 
fMRI is a noninvasive neuroimaging technique that can be used to study the neural correlates of complex cognitive, emotional, and perceptive processes. fMRI research holds tremendous promise for advancing the current understanding of the pathophysiology associated with psychiatric disorders where gross brain structure is preserved but disruptions of brain function exist. By revealing the neural correlates of symptoms, cognitive biases, and emotional responses, fMRI studies have already been used to elucidate the pathophysiology of dementia, mood, anxiety, psychotic, and addictive disorders and the mechanisms of psychopharmacological treatments for these conditions. To date, the clinical capabilities of fMRI for informing diagnostic or treatment decisions have not been established. The abnormalities identified by fMRI have thus far lacked sufficient sensitivity and specificity to discriminate individual patients from healthy subjects or from subjects with other illnesses. However, with future advances in the field, such as quantitative fMRI, it is hoped that the technique may ultimately lead the way to a pathophysiology-based classification of psychiatric phenotypes that can be used to improve both research and clinical practice. Examples of such research are provided below. 
fMRI of Dementia 
fMRI methods provide information that can potentially be used in the study, diagnosis, and prognosis of Alzheimer disease and other forms of dementia as well as providing insights into normal age-related changes in cognitive processing. Evidence that aging is associated with weaker and more diffuse activations as well as decreased hemispheric lateralization suggests either a compensation for lost regional intensity or a dedifferentiation of processing. The weaker activations, especially prefrontally, suggest potential encoding-stage dysfunctions associated with aging. The alterations in these processes that occur with neurodegenerative disease appear to be superimposed on the course of normal aging. fMRI studies have consistently demonstrated that patients with Alzheimer disease have decreased fMRI activation in the hippocampus and related structures within the MTL during the encoding of new memories compared to cognitively intact older subjects, including alterations in what is called the default mode network. More recently, combined PET/structural and FMRI revealed that decreased connectivity was associated with more white matter lesions and greater amyloid burden. Further studies are needed to validate the use of fMRI studies in these populations, particularly longitudinal studies to investigate the pattern of alterations in functional activity over the course of prodromal Alzheimer disease and the relationship to Alzheimer disease pathology. A major factor to consider is 

========781========

how 
age- 
and 
disease-related 
changes 
in 
vasculature 
affect 
the 
representation of neuronal function by fMRI. 
fMRI of Schizophrenia 
risk for developing impairments associated 
with 
the 
symptoms 
and 
and the 
cognitive impact of 
fMRI has emerged as the primary approach for probing disturbances in the activity of particular brain regions and specified circuits associated with the 
schizophrenia, 
schizophrenia, 
antipsychotic treatments. Given the large number of published studies (over 5,000 related papers since 1987 according to PubMed), the range of MR-based approaches included within the rubric of fMRI, and the enormous range of cognitive tests that have been used to stimulate cortical activity, a comprehensive review of fMRI studies of schizophrenia is 
beyond the scope of this review. 
Studies of Low-Frequency Cortical Connectivity 
Studies of functional connectivity of brain regions as assessed by fMRI are complementing the structural evidence emerging from DTI studies that the organization and integrity of white matter tracks is compromised in patients with schizophrenia. In these studies, functional connectivity is evaluated by quantifying the covariance of cortical activity across brain regions at rest over extended periods of time. 
fMRI studies of perception and cognition alterations associated with schizophrenia support the central hypothesis emerging from MRI, DTI, and functional connectivity studies, that is, that there are widespread alterations in regional brain functional activation that disturb the normal pattern of circuit activation associated with perception and higher cognitive functions including attention, learning and memory, and judgment. Here on the neuroimaging issues related to this research are discussed. A common assumption of this research is that these alterations in regional brain activation constitute the basis of the impairments in perceptual and cognitive processes associated with schizophrenia. While this assumption probably applies in a general way to these studies, EPI-BOLD imaging is actually measuring blood flow and volume changes rather than directly measuring neural activation and, as reviewed earlier current clinical research imaging, typically at 3.0 T, has modest temporal and spatial resolution with respect to the processes that it attempts to measure. Therefore, it is more accurate to assume that these studies provide an indirect measurement, a biomarker, of neural and glial processes that predominantly occur with spatial and temporal characteristics that exceed the resolution of fMRI. An additional complexity is that the relationship between the demands of a task and its ability to stimulate circuit activation is often nonlinear, that is, follows an inverted-U pattern. This issue 

========782========

emerged in the study of working memory deficits in schizophrenia where it was first shown that patients exhibited reduced prefrontal cortex activation when performing tasks that put demands on working memory. Later, using tasks of graded difficulty, it was shown that patients actually showed prefrontal hyperactivation relative to healthy subjects in response to easy tasks but began to show functional activation deficits in response to moderately difficult tasks when healthy individuals were showing further increases in prefrontal cortex activation. 
There are a number of additional challenges associated with the interpretation of fMRI studies of schizophrenia. First, because of widespread disturbances in brain structure, it is difficult to ascribe the underlying abnormality to the structure that performs abnormally, as opposed to its inputs. This limitation has profound implications for cognitive functions that are organized in a hierarchical or “bottom up” fashion, that is, judgment depends on memory, which depends on attention and perception. But there are also executive or “top down” controls of these processes, that is, we are more effective in perceiving and remembering stimuli that we expect or seek. From this perspective, the effort to determine the “central” cognitive impairments of schizophrenia and to ascribe particular cognitive impairments to particular brain regions is a challenging task. Second, because of their circuitry dysfunctions, individuals with schizophrenia may perform more poorly on tasks, or they may successfully perform particular tasks differently than individuals without schizophrenia, analogous to the way that individuals with hearing deficits learn to read lips. With regard to performance failure, studies typically select tasks that can be performed successfully by individuals with and without schizophrenia. However, there are many questions related to the performance deficits themselves. In this case, studies often use tasks with graded levels of difficulty so that the relationships between task difficulty, cortical activation, and performance may be determined. With regard to the second issue, it can be very difficult to know whether divergence between people with and without schizophrenia arises from the primary circuitry dysfunction or from the different strategies that these groups tend to use to solve the same types of problems. This highlights a critical issue for functional neuroimaging, which is the need to define structures of what people do and how they do it. Since one cannot obtain perfect control of these issues, it is useful and important to evaluate performance and, if possible, strategy. The effort to map circuitry dysfunction associated with schizophrenia, already challenging for the reasons outlined above, is made more difficult because the engagement of brain circuits in cognitive processes is highly state-dependent and therefore varies with level of emotional arousal, the impact of other state-dependent processes (such as the symptoms of schizophrenia), the presence of other neurobiological modulators (such as the impact of therapeutic medications, 

========783========

exposure to substances of abuse, and other psychiatric and medical comorbidities). 
fMRI of Mood Disorders 
Over 1,200 fMRI studies exploring various aspects of circuitry related to mood and mood disorders have been reported. Studies investigating the neural circuitry mediating adaptive emotion regulation and cognition have been instrumental in advancing the current understanding of the pathophysiology of mood and anxiety disorders. Functional imaging studies using PET, SPECT, and fMRI spectroscopy performed over the last decade have provided us with a much greater understanding of the structure and functional correlates of emotional and cognitive processing as well as mood regulation. Since individuals showing vulnerability to, or suffering from, episodes of depression, mania, and anxiety appear to exhibit impaired cognitive processing and a decreased ability to effectively regulate mood and affect, these findings are considered highly informative in identifying regions of specific interest to the neurobiology of the disorders. Functional brain imaging studies have identified critical neural circuits that modulate emotional behavior. Several frontolimbic networks including (1) the limbic–thalamic–cortical (LTC) circuit, comprising the amygdala, mediodorsal thalamus, and orbital and medial prefrontal cortices, and (2) the limbic–cortical–striatal–pallidal–thalamic (LCSPT) circuit, which includes components of the LTC circuit as well as areas of the striatum and pallidum, have emerged. Reciprocal connections between the various regions within the circuits are believed to modulate emotional responses. The use of fMRI to study the contributions of these networks to the pathophysiology of mood and anxiety disorders provides several unique advantages. The modality offers excellent spatial and temporal resolution relative to other methodologies, allowing the integration of cognitive and emotional tasks that serve as probes to activate the specific networks and further elucidates the interconnectiveness of the individual structures. However, it is important to understand that the measures are always made relative to other measures of brain activation and cannot be considered as absolute measures of brain activity. 
Although, as would be expected based on the heterogeneity of the illnesses and the multitude of study designs employed in the exploration, the method has yielded many inconsistent findings related to the function of these networks in individuals with mood and anxiety disorders, there is a growing consensus that disruptions in the function of these circuits do contribute to the pathophysiology of these disorders. For example, several groups have found activation of the amygdala, a region involved in identification and signaling of emotionally significant stimuli, to be increased and abnormally sustained during emotional task performance in subjects diagnosed with mood and anxiety disorders. Interestingly, 

========784========

abnormal amygdalar activation has also been observed in healthy individuals with the short allele of the functional promoter polymorphism for the serotonin transporter gene, suggesting a possible link of the increased stress-related susceptibility to depression associated with the genotype. 
The cingulate cortex, another region commonly found to exhibit abnormal patterns of CBF and metabolism in mood and anxiety disorder, patients receives inputs from the thalamus, as well as several cortical regions, and projects to the amygdala and entorhinal cortex via the cingulum. It functions as an integral component of the limbic system, being specifically involved in emotional processing, learning, memory, and the suppression of inappropriate unconscious priming. Activation of the subgenual ACC has repeatedly been measured to be decreased in unipolar and bipolar depression relative to control samples. However, after volume reductions in this region identified by MRI studies have been accounted, it is possible that the remaining tissue in this area actually exhibits a relative hypermetabolism. Depressed patients have been found to have greater activation of this region during processing of sad stimuli. 
Abnormal activation patterns of two other prefrontal cortical regions have also consistently been found to be associated with mood and anxiety disorders. Several studies have reported abnormally elevated levels of CBF and metabolism in the orbital cortex as well as in the VLPFC (a region believed to play a role in the learning of new affective stimulus associations and the reversal of previously learned associations) in individuals with mood and anxiety disorders. Dysfunction of these regions is postulated to predispose individuals to the perseverative cognitions and emotional responses characteristic of depression. fMRI studies have demonstrated an inverse relationship between amygdala and VMPFC activation when healthy individuals reappraise the affective meaning of negative pictures. Individuals showing increased VMPFC and decreased amygdala activation during reappraisal show steeper, more adaptive diurnal patterns of daily cortisol, suggesting that the capacity to successfully modulate limbic circuitry has implications for well-being in daily life. A recent study demonstrating a significantly different correlation between VMPFC and amygdala activation in control versus depressed individuals during an effortful affective reappraisal task further supports this notion. 
The DLPFC, a region specifically activated by cognitive tasks related to working memory and attention, has been consistently shown to exhibit abnormal reductions in CBF and metabolism associated with depression. The reduced activity of this region in response to cognitive task performance has been related to the deficits in cognitive performance characteristically observed in conjunction with mood disorders. Several fMRI studies demonstrate decreased DLPFC activity in response to cognitive tasks. Similar to the VLPFC, recent studies also find that 

========785========

depressed individuals display decreased relationships between amygdala and DLPFC activity, potentially signifying decreased functional relationships among these structures. 
The thalamus and the basal ganglia have extensive connections with the amygdala as well as the orbital cortex, VLPFC, and cingulate cortex. In addition the ventral striatum receives key projections from the VTA comprising part of a critical reward pathway of the brain. Unipolar depressed and bipolar depressed subjects both manifest abnormal increases of metabolism and CBF in the left mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus. Functional imaging studies of these regions in mood disorder subjects have shown them to have a decreased striatal response to happy stimuli during episodes of depression and increased striatal activity in a manic state. 
In summary, functional imaging studies afford a new window into the neural circuitry of emotional and cognitive processing, thus providing novel information that can be used in the generation and testing of new hypotheses. In conjunction with work derived from other branches of cognitive neuroscience, these studies have led to the general hypothesis that mood and anxiety disorders result from impaired function of the LCSPT circuits responsible for regulating emotional and cognitive processing. Specifically a “bottom up” model has been presented in which overactivation of limbic structures such as the amygdala drives enhanced emotional responsiveness to stimuli and further decreases the ability to effectively cognitively process the incoming stimuli due to reciprocal inhibition of the DLPFC. A second “top down” model postulates that the ability of higher-order cortical structures to modulate limbic activation is impaired in individuals with mood and anxiety disorders. Several studies have used fMRI protocols to identify specific activation patterns reflecting the top down or bottom up models that seem to be associated with treatment response. Additional studies are now underway to further explore the potential clinical relevance of these models and to determine if the patterns of activation could be used to predict differential treatment response to the various treatment interventions available. 
fMRI of Alcohol Dependence 
fMRI studies have provided insights into the functional consequences of alcoholism-related neurotoxicity. Studies suggest that recovering alcohol- dependent patients show abnormal activation patterns in frontal cortex, thalamus, striatum, cerebellum, and hippocampus related to impairments in attention, learning and memory, motor coordination, and inhibitory control of behavior. Studies have begun to explore pharmacologic modulation of resting circuit activity to probe mechanisms underlying circuit dysfunction in alcoholism, illustrated by blunted responses to benzodiazepines. 

========786========

Studies also have provided insights into the vulnerability to alcoholism. Adolescents and adults who abuse alcohol or who are at risk for abusing alcohol show circuit-related dysfunction associated with reward anticipation, response inhibition, control of attention, and other dimensions of cognition. In addition, these individuals show increased limbic and orbitofrontal cortex activation when exposed to alcohol-related cues that elicit alcohol craving, associated with structural abnormalities of the brain. Studies are now attempting to utilize these craving-related changes in fMRI for testing putative pharmacotherapies for alcoholism. 
1H 
MRS 
In 1983 spectra of small metabolites, including glutamate and GABA, were observed in the living rat brain by Kevin Behar in the laboratory of Robert Shulman at Yale University. Since that time MRS studies of the brain have expanded enormously in their variety and in their applications to the study of the human brain. Today, MRS is applied through much of the world for diagnosis and basic research on the brain in health and disease. 
MRS employs the differentiation of molecules, primarily on the basis of their frequencies. The most commonly used nuclei have been 
1H, 31P, 
and 13C. 
Figure 1.16–9B shows an example of a 
1H 
MR spectrum obtained in a human brain. The primary components of the MR spectrum are methyl groups of creatine and phosphocreatine, choline, and N-acetylaspartate (NAA). The two creatine compounds have resonances that overlap in vivo, so they appear as a single peak. Although creatine and phosphocreatine play key roles in cellular energetics, their combined level remains constant in the face of even severe acute challenges such as ischemia. Some chronic effects such as aging have been reported to increase, decrease, or have no effect on levels of tissue creatine, and this is one of the areas that is currently under active investigation in the MRS community. The choline resonance, comprised primarily of phosphocholine and glycerophosphocholine, is believed to reflect membrane degradation and synthesis, with a negligible contribution from acetylcholine. NAA is found primarily in glutamatergic neurons, including neuronal processes, and it is synthesized by N-acetyltransferase, a mitochondrial enzyme. Glia have transporters to import NAA and also contain the enzyme that degrades NAA, raising the possibility of a shuttle of NAA from neurons to glia. Indeed, there is evidence that the acetyl group of NAA is incorporated into myelin. Until the early 1990s, decreases in NAA were believed to signify neuronal death, but since that time studies have found conditions in which NAA decreases and then recovers. NAA is now believed to represent neuronal health, viability, or mitochondrial integrity. 
Much of MRS research has been based on these three metabolites that dominate the 
1H 
MR spectrum. Clinical applications have been proposed, including the diagnosis and evaluation of AD, hepatic encephalopathy, and 

========787========

other disorders. Other metabolites of neurochemical interest that can be detected using 
1H 
MRS are myo-inositol, glutamate, glutamine, GABA, and glutathione (GSH) and these have all been scrutinized from a research perspective in a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders. Glutamate, glutamine, and particularly GABA have required advanced MRS methods for detection in the human brain because they overlap with one another and are modulated into complex patterns under the influence of J- coupling. Methods classed as spectral editing are used to isolate the signals of GABA, glutamate, GSH, and other compounds from larger, overlapping resonances. Research is currently under way to assess if and how total tissue levels of glutamate and glutamine with respect to neurotransmitter activity and whether any of the MRS-detected chemicals can indicate neuroinflammation. 
Magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI), also called chemical shift imaging (CSI), combines the power of chemical discrimination with the ability to map their spatial distribution, and it is most commonly implemented for 
1H 
MRS. Because the signals from most detected neurochemicals are typically 5 to 6 orders of magnitude lower than that of water, the signal-to-noise ratio is much lower for MRSI measurements, significantly longer acquisition times are required to obtain adequate sensitivity, and the resolution is lower than what is normally used for MRI. However, the ability to view large areas of the brain simultaneously has led to the beginnings of clinical applications of this approach to conditions in which abnormalities must be localized, as in epilepsy, and conditions of dispersed changes in the brain, such as multiple sclerosis and alcoholism. 
31P 
MRS 
In 1978, Britton Chance and colleagues published MR spectra of the phosphorylated metabolites in the brain in a living mouse. 
31P 
MRS yields measurements of high-energy compounds, including phosphocreatine and ATP, and it can provide measurements of phosphomonoesters (PMEs) and phosphodiesters (PDEs) (Fig. 1.16–18), with applications to study schizophrenia, depression, and other disorders. The 
31P 
isotope nucleus is much less sensitive than that of 
1H 
on a per-atom basis, and further sensitivity is lost when one considers that many of the 
1H 
resonances represent methyl or ethylene groups that provide three or two nuclei per resonance, instead of just one. Favoring sensitivity is the fact that 100 percent of naturally occurring phosphorus is the isotope 
31P. 
The unique information that it provides on high-energy phosphates and other metabolites without destroying the tissue makes it a powerful tool for brain research. Some laboratories are applying MRSI of 
31P 
to map these neurochemicals throughout the brain. 
The dominant resonance in the 
31P 
spectrum of the brain is that of 

========788========

phosphocreatine, which by convention is assigned a chemical shift of 0 ppm. To the right are three resonances that represent the γ, α, and β resonances of nucleotide triphosphates (NTPs). To the left are the PME, PDE, and inorganic phosphate. The PME and PDE resonances are believed to reflect mobile components of lipids and membrane metabolites. Inorganic phosphate is free phosphate that has been released from phosphocreatine and ATP during energy consumption. In cases of extreme insults, such as ischemia, the phosphocreatine resonance falls, the NTP resonances decrease, and the inorganic phosphate peak rises as the high- energy phosphate pool is exhausted and the phosphate groups are released. In psychiatric disorders, the changes are generally more subtle, with some reports of altered PME or PDE, although the directionality and extent of the changes are uncertain at this time. Recent advances have moved kinetic studies of 
31P 
metabolism to application in the brain, from muscle, where they have been used for many years. A technique called saturation transfer reduces the signal of 
31P 
in one chemical, like phosphocreatine, and then tracks the signal reduction in ATP when the phosphorus is transferred from phosphocreatine to ATP. This approach has allowed the measurement of phosphocreatine and ATP synthesis in the brain. 
13C 
MRS 
Less common is 
13C 
MRS, used to detect the nonradioactive isotope carbon-13, which naturally occurs as 1.1 percent of the world’s carbon. Like most 
1H 
MRS and all 
31P 
MRS, 
13C 
MRS remains a research tool, and in that role it has proven useful for the measurement of kinetics of neuroenergetic processes and neurotransmission. Its primary application in the brain has been the measurement of carbon oxidation and glutamate– glutamine neurotransmitter cycling. 
13C 
carries the powerful advantage of a broad chemical shift dispersion that allows the resolution of many metabolites that cannot be resolved in the 
1H 
MR spectrum. For example, glutamate and glutamine C4 and C3 resonances are completely resolved even at a magnetic field strength of 1.5 T, with the resolution improving further at higher field strengths. The great disadvantage of 
13C 
is that its sensitivity is even less than that of 
31P 
on a per-atom basis, and the sensitivity is further reduced by its low natural abundance. However, that low natural abundance can be turned into an advantage if viewed from the perspective that it contributes very little background signal (Fig. 1.16–19). That low level of background means that if 
13C 
is introduced into metabolic pathways and is incorporated into neurochemicals, then almost everything that is detected is known to result from the added carbon. This was first done in cell suspensions and then rabbits and rats and is now applied by several laboratories to studies of metabolism in the human brain. The most commonly used method today is the administration of 
3C-glucose 
or 
13C-acetate, 
which leads to labeling of 

========789========

glutamate, glutamine, and GABA through glycolysis, oxidation, and the release and trafficking of neurotransmitters among neurons and astrocytes. The incorporation of 
13C 
is tracked over time simultaneously in multiple metabolites, and the more rapid the metabolic processes in the relevant pathways, the faster will be the appearance of the 
13C 
in the MR spectra. The glucose generally provides more information about neurons, while acetate yields greater sensitivity to glial metabolism. 
FIGURE 1.16–18.31PMRSinahealthyvolunteer,usinga4-Tmagnet.Left:T1-weighted image obtained with inversion recovery to null the CSF and create contrast between gray and white matter. Right: Spectrum that shows, from left to right, phosphomonoesters (PMEs), inorganic phosphate (Pi), phosphodiesters (PDEs), phosphocreatine (PCr), and the γ, α, and β phosphate residues of the nucleotide phosphates. (Courtesy of Jullie Pan, M.D., Ph.D., Yale University.) 
FIGURE 1.16–19.13CMRspectrafromahumanbrainbefore(bottom)andduring(top) a 2-hour infusion of [1–13C]glucose. Before the infusion, only the 1.1 percent natural abundance signals can be seen in the spectrum. When exogenous 
13C 
is provided in glucose, through metabolism the isotope appears in numerous products in the brain and can be detected with 
13C 
MRS. At left can be seen the glucose itself. The largest single resonance is that of the C4 of glutamate (Glu C4). C3 and C2 of glutamate are also present, as are C4, C3, and C2 of glutamine (Gln). GABA is labeled at the C2, C3, and C4 positions, and aspartate (Asp) is labeled at C2. Lactate (Lac) is labeled at the C3 position. NAA and creatine (Cr) appear similar in the natural abundance and labeled spectra, because their 

========790========

synthesis is too slow for significant labeling to occur in 2 hours. 
Different methods have been developed to detect 
13C, 
with the appropriate choices based on the applications. The simplest approach is direct detection, which requires excitation and detection only of the 
13C nuclei. The sensitivity can be increased by up to threefold by preapplying radio frequency at the 
1H 
frequency, in what is called the nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE). Polarization transfer, a more complex approach, can increase the sensitivity by up to a factor of four by transferring some of the larger polarization of coupled 
1H 
nuclei to the 
13C 
nuclei through covalent bonds, and for the acquisition the 
13C 
nuclei are observed. Proton- observed/carbon-edited (POCE) spectroscopy provides a greater improvement in sensitivity. POCE detects 
1H 
that are bonded to 
13C, 
and because the 
1H 
nuclei are observed, the detection has the much greater sensitivity of 
1H 
MRS. The greater sensitivity means that volumes of a few milliliters can be studied, instead of 75 mL or more for the methods that acquire data in the 
13C 
domain. The primary disadvantage is that the detection in the 
1H 
domain eliminates the benefits of the high resolution available from the 
13C 
chemical shift dispersion. Heteronuclear single quantum coherence spectroscopy (HSQC) provides a way to achieve the resolution available in the 
13C 
spectrum with the sensitivity of the 
1H acquisition, by yielding data that simultaneously contain the information that would be seen by acquiring both nuclei, and this holds promise for achieving higher spatial resolution. 
APPLICATIONS OF MRS IN PSYCHIATRY 
As MRI provides information about brain structure and fMRI provides information about regional brain function, MRS provides information related to brain chemistry and metabolism. In many ways it is the youngest and least developed of the MR methodologies, and until more recently its application to psychiatry has also been limited by its relatively poor spatial and temporal resolution and need for technical expertise. However, information provided by MRS studies in vivo over the past decade has proven valuable to identify neurochemical and metabolic abnormalities associated with several psychiatric disorders that have helped to reshape the current thinking related to the pathophysiological models of these disorders. With the advent of improved MRS imaging techniques and dissemination of expertise, the modality is gaining greater application to psychiatric research that is allowing the field to examine novel hypotheses related to pathophysiology and pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders. 
MRS in Dementia 
1H 
MRS presents the opportunity to obtain noninvasive measures of several neurochemicals related to neurotransmission, energy metabolism, 

========791========

and cellular function. Studies using 
1H 
MRS have shown a trend for a general reduction in NAA measures with increasing age in medial temporal and frontal cortical brain regions, but with greater decreases in dementia and NAA levels related to plaque density. NAA is perhaps the most reliably measured metabolite in the brain due to it being present between 7 and 13 mmol/kg and the physical characteristics of the molecule (presence of identical three hydrogen atoms on a methyl group that provide triple the sensitivity of what would be provided by a single proton). As mentioned above, the significance of brain NAA content is not completely understood. It is commonly believed to serve as a marker of neuronal health, but it is also known to reflect aspects of mitochondrial energy metabolism and myelin maintenance. The studies in MCI and AD are in general agreement, reporting patients with these disorders to have decreased levels of NAA and increased levels of myo-inositol (a form of inositol normally found in the brain that contributes to osmotic regulation) compared to those of age- matched comparison subjects. One interpretation is that decreased NAA and increased myo-inositol are related to the loss of neurons and an increase in gliosis. However, the loss of NAA may reflect decreases in neural function. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that the changes in NAA can be reversed in some conditions. Several groups have also reported a correlation between the reductions in NAA content and clinical neuropsychological scores. Interestingly, this correlation has also recently been reported in healthy volunteer subjects. 
Overall, studies of other metabolites have been less convincing in relationship to AD and other dementias, but a few studies suggest decreased levels of glutamate and elevated levels of glutamine can be found in subjects with MCI impairment and AD. Together these findings are believed to reflect a combination of ongoing metabolic dysfunction and increased gliosis. At present there is no clinical use of MRS in the diagnosis or treatment of dementia. 
MRS in Schizophrenia 
1H 
MRS has been applied widely in studies of cortical chemistry in schizophrenia. These studies documented reductions in NAA levels in many cortical and limbic brain regions in schizophrenic individuals and smaller reductions in family members of people diagnosed with schizophrenia. NAA level reductions have been described in some brain regions in medication-naïve patients, but there also do appear to be progressive reductions with advancing illness and continued antipsychotic treatment. Because NAA is localized to neurons, reductions in NAA levels may reflect the postmortem findings of reduced neuronal size and reduced dendritic arborization as well in vivo evidence from DTI studies of disturbances in the integrity of long fiber pathways. However, NAA is synthesized by a mitochondrial enzyme. As a result, reduced NAA levels 

========792========

may reflect metabolic disturbances that may be related to mitochondrial dysfunction suggested in postmortem studies or regional metabolic alterations associated with the pathophysiology of schizophrenia or the impact of treatment. This possibility is consistent with the emerging differences between the impact of typical and atypical antipsychotic treatment upon NAA levels in patients. Other metabolites have been measured in 
1H 
MRS studies of schizophrenic patients. The most interesting findings to date may be the description of normal or low levels of glutamate and increased levels of glutamine and GABA in medication- free patients with schizophrenia, with evidence accumulating that medication may be responsible for some of the abnormal metabolite levels reported in schizophrenia. Brain glutamine is synthesized primarily by glia from glutamate that emerges as a by-product of energy metabolism as well as from glutamate that is taken up by glia following its release by neurons and glia in the context of excitatory neurotransmission. Thus, it is possible that the alterations of glutamine and glutamate in individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia could reflect changes in glutamatergic neurotransmission. Consistent with this view, one preliminary study suggested that glutamine elevations were not present in medication-free patients who were receiving benzodiazepines, drugs that would be predicted to suppress excitatory neurotransmission. 
A number of other metabolites have been examined using 
1H 
MRS and 31P 
MRS in patients with schizophrenia including glutathione, choline, PME, and PDE. These metabolites are of potential interest because of studies of these metabolites that suggest that schizophrenia is associated with inflammation and abnormalities in membrane integrity and might be reflective of disturbances in the processing of myelin suggested by postmortem and clinical molecular genetic studies. However, the relationships of these metabolites to specific membrane disturbances associated with schizophrenia remain unclear. Also, in the 
31P 
MRS studies, inconsistencies in the findings made by various groups have called these findings into question, generally. However, they may be consistent with recent findings using magnetization transfer that oxidative phosphorylation is slower in schizophrenia, using a volume of tissue that included a large fraction of white matter, indirectly suggest that myelin may be compromised in patients with schizophrenia. 
MRS in Mood Disorders 
There has been a rapid increase in the use of MRS in the study of mood and anxiety disorders over the past decade. While the methodology does not yet enter into the clinical practice related to the diagnosis and treatment of mood disorders, it has in part led to an evolution in the concepts of the pathophysiology of the disorders. The majority of studies have used either 1H 
MRS or 
31P 
MRS to provide information about the abnormalities in 

========793========

neurochemistry and energy metabolism associated with the illnesses. A few other studies have used 
7Li 
and 
19F 
MRS to study the pharmacokinetics and brain concentrations of drugs used in the treatment of mood and anxiety disorders. Recent new work suggests that the use of 
13C 
MRS will be useful in further defining the pathophysiology of the disorders. 
To date, 
1H 
MRS has been the most widely used MRS methodology in the study of mood disorders. While the technology continues to evolve, several of the measures are becoming more routine and reliable, thus allowing for investigators to more confidently draw conclusions from data obtained at different sites using different protocols and spectrometers. 
There have been over 200 published studies examining NAA levels in relation to mood and anxiety disorders. However, due to the heterogeneity of the illnesses studied and variety of regions examined it remains difficult to draw firm conclusions regarding NAA’s contributions to the neurobiology of mood disorders. In general, there have not been consistent findings showing NAA changes in association with major depression. Yet, there have been specific studies suggesting that NAA may be reduced in the hippocampus of depressed and anxious patients. There is also some evidence suggesting that NAA levels may be reduced in the frontal lobe of bipolar patients, potentially serving as a diagnostic marker. The creatine peak is believed to remain relatively constant in most disorders, leading to the use of creatine as an internal standard in many studies. Studies examining creatine in relation to mood disorders appear to be in general agreement with this view, but exceptions do exist. Choline is an essential precursor to membrane lipids and the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. A series of studies seem to demonstrate elevated choline levels in the basal ganglia of mood disorder subjects compared to those of healthy comparisons. These studies have been suggested as evidence of altered membrane turnover and impaired signal transduction mechanisms within the basal ganglia of patients. 
As the major inhibitory and excitatory neurotransmitters in the brain, it is not surprising that the amino acid neurotransmitters GABA and glutamate have been linked to the pathophysiology of several neuropsychiatric disorders, thus making them extremely interesting targets for MRS investigation. Due to overlapping resonances, these compounds are more difficult to measure using standard 
1H 
MRS methods. This has delayed the use of MRS to study the amino acid neurotransmitters and led many to use the term Glx to refer to the combined measure of the GABA, glutamate, and glutamine. With the development of several new editing techniques, several groups are now capable of isolating the individual peaks. The relatively recent application of MRS to investigate amino acid neurotransmitter systems has proven highly productive in the area of mood disorders research, and there is mounting evidence that suggests markedly abnormal concentrations of GABA and glutamate in several brain regions 

========794========

of mood and anxiety disorder patients. Furthermore, recent studies suggest that antidepressant treatments may be capable of reversing some of these abnormalities. These data helped to increase the awareness of a potential role of the amino acid neurotransmitters in the neurobiology of mood disorders and the mechanism of antidepressant action. Since it is now recognized that glial cell function is critical to amino acid neurotransmitter metabolism, these data in conjunction with several postmortem findings have also provided support for a pathophysiological model of glial cell impairment in relation to MDD. Recent observations of altered brain glutathione levels in mood disorders may also be related to alterations in glial/neuronal interactions. 
31P 
MRS provides in vivo measures of brain membrane phospholipid metabolism, high-energy phosphate metabolism, and intracellular pH. Initial 
31P 
MRS studies in bipolar disorder set out to test the hypothesis that the phosphoinositide pathway is enhanced in bipolar disorder and to explore the contributions of membrane phospholipids and membrane defects in bipolar disorder by measuring levels of PME and PDE. A meta- analysis of these studies found significant diagnosis- and mood state- dependent abnormalities in PME content in patients with bipolar disorder, which suggests dysregulation of brain-signal transduction systems and membrane metabolism may have relevance in bipolar disorder. Further, they suggest that lithium treatment increases PME levels, providing a possible clue into the mechanism of action. 
Other studies have attempted to evaluate whether neuroenergetic defects are related to mood disorders by measuring the concentrations of nucleotide phosphates (the three phosphate residues from NTP) and phosphocreatine. In general, these studies have found lower levels of nucleoside phosphates in the basal ganglia of subjects in depressive episodes, suggesting that high-energy phosphate metabolism is altered in the basal ganglia of subjects with depression and drawing attention to the possible role that the mitochondria may play in mood disorders. 
Reduced pHi has been observed in pathological states arising from ischemic insult to the brain. Abnormalities in pHi concentration have also been reported in bipolar subjects. Several studies have found significantly reduced pHi in both the basal ganglia and whole brain of bipolar subjects in the euthymic state, while other studies have found increased pHi levels to be associated with the bipolar and depressed states. While the specific pathophysiology underlying these effects remains unknown, the findings have helped to focus attention on the potential contributions of neuroenergetics to mood disorders. 
As described earlier in this chapter, the unique physical properties of 13C 
make it an excellent tool to measure rates of glucose metabolism as well as amino acid neurotransmitter cycling, and being a stable isotope, it does 

========795========

not present the risks and challenges associated with radiochemical research. Studies using glucose labeled with 
13C 
have been used to measure the rates of glucose oxidation, glutamate/glutamine cycling, and GABA synthesis. Studies using 
13C-labeled 
acetate have recently yielded measures of glial cell metabolism, a potentially valuable tool considering the recent findings suggesting that glial cell pathology may play a prominent role in the neurobiology of mood disorders. Although the application of 
13C 
MRS in vivo is relatively new to psychiatry, recent data show significantly lower rates of oxidative metabolism in unmedicated patients with major depression. Future studies using this modality are likely to provide new insights into the association relationships between mood disorders, neuroenergetics, amino acid neurotransmitter functioning, and glial cell function. 
MRS in Alcohol Dependence 
1H 
MRS studies evaluating NAA and choline have provided neurochemical evidence that complements the MRI findings related to the emergence and recovery from alcohol-related neurotoxicity. 
1H 
MRS studies of GABA have provided insights into alterations in cortical inhibitory neurotransmissions associated with the recovery from alcohol dependence. During acute withdrawal, cortical GABA levels appear to be normal, consistent with animal studies. With recovery from alcohol dependence, cortical GABA levels appear to decline and may be significantly below the level seen in healthy subjects with extended sobriety. These time-dependent changes in cortical GABA levels during sobriety have been hypothesized to reflect recovery from the adaptations in GABAA receptor populations produced by chronic ethanol exposure. 
13C 
measures may reveal factors that promote energetic factors, which promote heavy drinking and relapse, such as enhanced ability of the brain to oxidize alcohol and its metabolic product, acetate. To the extent that the brain becomes dependent on acetate as a fuel, withdrawal from alcohol may be compounded by the near-absence of circulating acetate once patients stop drinking. Further, when alcohol is oxidized, it creates acetaldehyde, which has been shown to have rewarding properties inside the brain, even though systemically acetaldehyde is aversive. 
7Li 
and 
19F 
MRS 
A few studies have attempted to use 
7Li 
MRS to study the pharmacokinetics of lithium as it relates to the treatment of mood disorders. These studies have demonstrated that lithium relatively rapidly clears the BBB and has approximately a 28-hour half-life in the brain. A potentially powerful clinical application of the methodology is the ability to measure brain concentrations of Li relative to serum levels and to assess intracellular 

========796========

versus extracellular lithium. While limited in number, these studies seem to suggest only a modest correlation between serum lithium levels that are commonly used to titrate treatment dosage and brain lithium concentration. Similarly, studies have employed 
19F 
MRS to determine the pharmacokinetics and the relationship between serum and brain levels of fluorine-containing drugs such as fluoxetine and fluvoxamine. While such studies are of limited clinical usefulness at present, they may be useful in determining dose–response relationships for other compounds in the future. 
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Although the technology invokes some complexities, there are practical considerations of safety and comfort that are of great importance when considering a possible MRI or MRS scan for a patient. 
Safety 
The primary consideration is the safety of the patient. MRI and MRS are considered to be among the safest ways to examine the human body. Because MRI and MRS use magnetism and radio waves, and not x-rays, they are not known to be mutagenic or associated with cancer risk like methods that use ionizing radiation. Radio waves can cause heating of tissue, including of the brain, so the United States FDA has set guidelines for magnet strength and exposure to radio waves, and the manufacturers and operators of MR equipment carefully observe those guidelines. For exposure to the radio frequencies, powers, and durations that are used in human MR scans, no harmful effects have been seen. 
MRI and MRS pose some risks for certain people. People who have a pacemaker or certain metal objects inside their bodies are generally not candidates for MR scans, because the strong magnets in the MR scanner might cause the implants to malfunction or move. Aneurysm clips pose a particularly major risk. As current technologies increase magnetic field strength, one must take care with metallic products that are designated to be MR-safe. As far as can be achieved, companies attempt to maintain the necessary qualities of their products while removing as much of the ferromagnetism from the material as possible. However, trace levels of ferromagnetism may remain, posing a greater risk as magnetic field strengths increase. The claims of MR compatibility are generally true for the magnetic field strength of 1.5 T or lower, and in some cases, the devices are safe at 3 T. However, many devices have not been tested above 1.5 T, and fewer still above 3 T, so for now, many metallic implants pose an unknown and unacceptable risk above 3 T and should be checked individually for compatibility at a given magnetic field strength. 
Another risk is that of a metallic object flying through the air toward the 

========797========

magnet and hitting the patient. To reduce this risk, MR facilities usually require all personnel, including the patient, to remove all metal from their clothing and all metal objects from their pockets. In many cases, patients will be required to wear hospital garb. Nothing metal can be brought into a magnet room except for equipment or supplies that have been specially screened by the MR operators. The doors to the magnet room should be kept closed except for brief entry and exit by the operators and patient or by personnel directly approved by the operators. Failure to safeguard against this risk has resulted in catastrophes, such as the death of a child when a magnetic oxygen cylinder crushed his skull at speeds in excess of 50 miles per hour. A less dramatic but more common risk is that of injury to a patient’s eye from a flying ballpoint pen or a paperclip. 
A common question is about the safety of pregnancy. At magnetic field strengths of 1.5 T, in use since the early 1980s, and 3 T, in use since the early 1990s, no adverse effects of the magnetic field have been associated with pregnancy or reproductive health. Above magnet field strengths of 3 T, far fewer data exist, although no ill effects have been reported at this time. At 7 T and higher, some individuals experience nausea or dizziness when entering or leaving the magnetic field, due to magnetic field effects on the inner ear while moving through the region at which the magnetic field changes near the bore of the magnet. 
The use of injectable contrast agents poses an additional but small source of risk. There are the risks associated with the placement of an intravenous line, including bruising and infection, although the lines should be placed with care under sterile conditions that minimize those risks. The FDA has approved contrast agents that contain the metal gadolinium for use in human subjects and does not recognize any major risks with its use. Less than 3 percent of patients may experience mild nausea, headache, or dizziness after the injection, and those side effects usually resolve themselves without treatment. Less than 1 percent of patients experience an anaphylactic reaction, including hives, itching, or difficulty breathing. Subjects should be asked if they have a history of allergic reactions to MR or other injected contrast agents or if they have a history of kidney disease, asthma, allergic respiratory disorders, or anemia or other diseases that affect red blood cells. Women who are pregnant are generally not given gadolinium contrast agents in the United States, although in Europe it has been judged to be safe and is permitted. Women who are breastfeeding are instructed to express milk for 48 hours after the scan before returning to breastfeeding. 
A magnet quench was described earlier in this chapter as the sudden de- energization of the magnet, accompanied by a rapid boil off of liquid helium and possibly nitrogen. Nitrogen and helium are inert and nontoxic, but in confined spaces they displace oxygen and can cause suffocation. Therefore, MR scanners are equipped with ventilation systems to remove 

========798========

those gases in the event of a quench. Furthermore, on the very rare occasion that a quench occurs, the operators are trained to remove a patient immediately from the magnet room. Patients are unlikely to be present at the times that a quench is most likely to occur, these being during magnet energization that occurs at installation or after major equipment upgrades, or when helium is being added to the magnet to replace material that has slowly been lost from the system. Quenches may also occur if a large metal object strikes the magnet. To date, no patients have been injured or killed by quenches. 
What to Tell the Patient before a Scan 
A patient should be told that the study requires lying on a bed, usually with a detector that has some rods that are placed around the head. The bed is rolled into the scanner, which typically looks like a tube, so that the individual’s head is approximately centered along the length of the tube, and the feet, legs, and sometimes even the waist lie outside the tube. Patients should be told that the machine does not move, although they will hear knocking and other sounds and possibly feel some vibrations while the scanner is acquiring the data. It is crucial to stress the need to hold still. Movement can lead to images that are blurry or otherwise uninterpretable. If there is an injection of contrast agent, the individual may feel some discomfort associated with the intravenous line, just as any intravenous catheter may cause some bruising or other discomfort. Otherwise, MR has no painful parts. 
Some people feel uncomfortable or anxious because of having to lie still in a tube that is generally less than three feet in diameter and several feet long. If a subject is feeling anxious, then a small dose of an anxiolytic drug such as a benzodiazepine is sometimes administered, as long as it does not adversely affect the measurements. A subject should be told that the operators will monitor them constantly by sight and sound, so a patient can ask the operator to be brought out of the scanner. It is important to warn a patient that some people feel dizzy, develop some stomach upset, experience a metallic taste, or find tingling sensations or muscle twitches. These sensations usually go away quickly, but it is important to tell the research staff if they occur. 
The patient should be presented with an MR safety questionnaire to be answered very carefully, and it is important to verify the answers verbally with each patient. If parents accompany a child into the MRI room, the parents should be screened likewise. The questionnaire will ask about surgical history and the presence of a variety of potentially MR- incompatible items, including pacemakers, intrauterine contraceptive devices, aneurysm clips, and injuries from shrapnel and metal work, especially to the eye. Patients commonly ask questions about implanted metal including dental work and screws used to repair broken bones. 

========799========

Fillings are safe. Most permanently installed dental work is safe. Partial plates that can be removed should be removed before the scan, partly for safety but primarily because ferromagnetic material in some of them can cause T2* effects that compromise the quality of the MRI or MRS. Bone screws and other surgically implanted materials should be examined in conjunction with the MR facility’s safety officer. An x-ray or review of a patient’s surgical records may be necessary to evaluate the presence and MRI compatibility of internal materials. The patient should be encouraged more than once to read the safety form carefully and ask questions about any uncertainties, even if the patient thinks that it is probably safe. It is best for a patient to ask about something that poses no risk than to keep quiet out of embarrassment and die. 
Jewelry is a major source of questions and sometimes of resistance. Although patients often refuse, they should not enter the magnet room without first removing piercing jewelry, such as tongue rings, nose rings, belly button rings, and earrings. They may claim that a favorite necklace is pure gold, which is nonmagnetic, only to have the MR machine demonstrate the opposite. In some cases, an inadequately anchored piece, such as the backing of an earring, can come loose and pose a flying hazard or become lodged in a joint somewhere in magnet cowell or gradient coil assembly. A more common problem is that the small quantities of ferromagnetic materials distort or, in some cases, generate huge holes to appear in the MRI, even when the patient clearly has an intact head. Safety is enhanced if a blanket ban on jewelry is followed. 
A significant number of subjects in the general population are likely to show abnormalities. When these are unexpected, they are called incidentalomas, and the proper course of action upon finding an incidentaloma has been and continues to be a subject of debate. Observations that are of potential clinical significance should be referred to a radiologist for evaluation and decisions about further courses of action. For example, aneurysms pose cause for further evaluation. Some conditions, such as an asymptomatic meningioma in an 85-year-old woman, might be best monitored but untreated unless symptoms later emerge. Each case must be evaluated on its own circumstances and according the policies of each institution. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Today, established MR technologies provide a limited but valuable clinical service to psychiatry through their ability to rule out gross structural abnormalities. Presently, most of the methodologies described in this chapter are used to acquire data in academic research settings in efforts to help psychiatrists understand the pathophysiology, pathogenesis, and treatment of psychiatric disorders. 
The primary limitations that face MR today are spatial resolution, 

========800========

sensitivity, and cost. Regarding spatial resolution, MRI data in humans are rarely acquired with grid sizes finer than 0.5 to 0.75 μL and more typically 1.5 to 2 μL. The sensitivity of MRS is typically far less than that of MRI, because the concentrations of the metabolites are far less than those of the water and fat that are usually detected for MRI, with a general limitation of 0.5 to 1 mmol/kg as the detection limit in the human brain in vivo, with volumes in some cases as small as 0.25 mL but more typically 8 mL for 
1H MRS and larger volumes for 
31P 
and 
13C. 
Because of the need to detect lower concentrations, MRSI fares more poorly than MRI with regard to resolution and/or sensitivity, but the ability to map chemicals through the brain provides a unique power to investigate mental illnesses. Although whole-brain 
1H 
MRS can be implemented, much of the brain is poorly shimmed and yields no useful data. Methods that greatly improve problematic shimming are also under development and may resolve this problem in the coming years. fMRI receives great attention in the psychiatric research community today, and a major limitation that must be kept in mind when interpreting the imaging results is that the measurement is relative, and any function-related changes must be evaluated in the context of possible baseline conditions. Cost poses an impediment to increases of diagnostic approaches with new MR methodologies. With scans now costing $500 to $4,000, depending on the procedures ordered and the institution where the scan is done, additional methods will only gain widespread acceptance if they are clearly shown to add clinically significant information. 
The future of MR can be viewed from several perspectives. The noninvasive, nonradioactive nature of MR provides a strong impetus for continued development in the diagnostic evaluation of patients and use in basic science research. By virtue of its safety profile, MR is likely to support research on childhood manifestations of psychiatric disorders. Magnetic field strengths for research scanners are increasing, having reached 9.4 T for human use; higher magnetic field strengths for most brain studies represent greater sensitivity. As manufacturers gain experience with higher-field research machines, the technology has in the past lowered the cost of medium-field magnets and led to the improvements in reliability and stability. A second potential advance lies with the elimination of helium as the coolant for the superconducting wire in the magnet. Helium currently poses a significant cost of installation and operation of MR scanners. The cost is rising with increasing limitations on worldwide helium supplies, and some industry sources predict exhaustion of the world supply by the year 2030. Researchers around the world are working to develop superconductors with the necessary physical flexibility and ability to carry large electrical currents at liquid nitrogen temperatures and also more powerful permanent magnets (not produced by electric currents); such breakthroughs should lower MR operating costs and eliminate the 

========801========

need for the limited helium supply. Another area of intense investigation is hyperpolarization of 
13C, 
increasing its sensitivity by several orders of magnitude. Researchers are actively pursuing the use of hyperpolarized 
13C for use as nontoxic contrast agents for angiography and metabolism. A very different approach, molecular MRI, is increasing the ability to monitor processes such as the migration of nerve cells, gene expression, and targeting of particular cell types. Such molecular imaging abilities remain in the realm of research on animals, but as methods continue to develop, they appear likely to find their way to applications to human diseases. 
In the future, MR is likely to find increasing utility as a research tool, because it provides a quantitative window on neuroanatomy, function, and neurochemistry. Developers are also working to turn the research methodologies into robust clinical techniques for the testing and use of biomarkers to monitor treatment efficacies. MR studies are becoming increasingly multimodal, with various types of MRI and MRS acquired in single scan sessions and on individual subjects, as well as in complementary measurements with methods like PET and EEG recordings. As outlined above, MR has already begun to change the current thinking with respect to the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders, neuroenergetics, amino acid neurotransmission, and plasticity. From most perspectives, MR appears likely to continue to do so in the future. 
REFERENCES 
Abdallah CG, Jiang L, De Feyter HM, et al. Glutamate metabolism in major depressive disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2014;171:1320–1327. 
Ai T, Morelli JN, Hu X, et al. A historical overview of magnetic resonance imaging, focusing on technological innovations. Invest Radiol. 2012;47:725–741. 
Attwell D, Laughlin SB. An energy budget for signaling in the grey matter of the brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2001;21:1133. 
Brown GG, Eyler LT. Methodological and conceptual issues in functional magnetic resonance imaging: applications to schizophrenia research. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2006;2:51. Carlson PJ, Singh JB, Zarate CA Jr., Drevets WC, Manji HK. Neural circuitry and neuroplasticity in mood disorders: insights for novel therapeutic targets. NeuroRx. 2006;3:22. 
Chang L, Friedman J, Ernst T, Zhong K, Tsopelas ND. Brain metabolite abnormalities in the white matter of elderly schizophrenic subjects: implication for glial dysfunction. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;62:1396. 
Drevets WC, Price JL, Simpson JR, Todd RD, Reich T. Subgenual prefrontal cortex abnormalities in mood disorder. Nature. 1997;386:824. 
Du F, Cooper AJ, Thida T, et al. In vivo evidence for cerebral bioenergetic abnormalities in schizophrenia measured using 
31P 
magnetization transfer spectroscopy. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71:19–27. 
Dukart J, Mueller K, Barthel H, Villringer A, Sabri O, Schroeter ML, for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Meta-analysis based SVM classification enables accurate detection of 

========802========

Alzheimer’s disease across different clinical centers using FDG-PET and MRI. Psychiatry Res Neuroimag. 2013;212:230–236. 
Feldstein Ewing SW, Sakhardande A, Blakemore SJ. The effect of alcohol consumption on the adolescent brain: a systematic review of MRI and fMRI studies of alcohol-using youth. Neuroimage: Clinical. 2014;5:420–437. 
Goghari VM, Rehm K, Carter CS, MacDonald AW III. Regionally specific cortical thinning and gray matter abnormalities in the healthy relatives of schizophrenia patients. Cereb Cortex. 2007;17:415. 
Hanson LG. Is Quantum Mechanics Necessary for Understanding Magnetic Resonance? Concepts in Magnetic Resonance Part A. 2008;32:329–340. 
Jiang L, Gulanski BI, de Feyter Weinzimer S, et al. Increased brain uptake and oxidation of acetate in heavy drinkers. J Clin Inv. 2013;123:1605–1614. 
Kegeles LS, Mao X, Stanford AD, et al. Elevated prefrontal cortex γ-aminobutyric acid and glutamate-glutamine levels in schizophrenia measured in vivo with proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2012;69:449–459. 
Kempton MJ, Salvador Z, Munafò MR, et al. Structural neuroimaging studies in major depressive disorder. Meta-analysis and comparison with bipolar disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68:675–690. 
Kroenke CD, Rohlfing T, Park B, Sullivan EV, Pfefferbaum A, Kathleen Grant KA. Monkeys that voluntarily and chronically drink alcohol damage their brains: a longitudinal MRI study. Neuropsychopharm. 2014;39:823–830. 
Kugaya A, Sanacora G. Beyond monoamines: glutamatergic function in mood disorders. CNS Spectr. 2005;10:808. 
Lee MH, Smyser CD, Shimony JS. Resting-state fMRI: a review of methods and clinical applications. Am J Neurorad. 2013;34:1866–1872. 
Mahon PB, Lee DS, Trinh H, et al. Morphometry of the amygdala in schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar disorder. Schizophrenia Res. 2015; in press. 
Minati L, Grisoli M, Bruzzone MG. MR spectroscopy, functional MRI, and diffusion-tensor imaging in the aging brain: a conceptual review. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2007;20:3. Niciu MJ, Mason GF. Neuroimaging in alcohol and drug dependence. Curr Behav Neurosci Reports. 2014;1:45–54. 
Ogawa S, Menon RS, Tank DW, Kim SG, Merkle H. Functional brain mapping by blood oxygenation level-dependent contrast magnetic-resonance imaging—A comparison of signal characteristics with a biophysical model. Biophys J. 1993;64:803. 
Pfefferbaum A, Rosenbloom MJ, Chu W, et al. White matter microstructural recovery with abstinence and decline with relapse in alcohol dependence interacts with normal ageing: a controlled longitudinal DTI study. Lancet Psychiatry. 2014;1:202–212. 
Redlich R, Almeida JJ, Grotegerd D, et al. Brain morphometric biomarkers distinguishing unipolar and bipolar depression. A voxel-based morphometry-pattern classification approach. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71:1222–1230. 
Sheline YI. Neuroimaging studies of mood disorder effects on the brain. Biol Psychiatry. 2003;54:338. 
Urenjak J, Williams SR, Gadian DG, Noble M. Specific expression of N-acetylaspartate in 

========803========

neurons, oligodendrocytes in vitro. J Neurochem. 1992;59:55. 
Wang J, Du H, Jiang L, Ma X, de Graaf R, Behar K, et al. Oxidation and effects of ethanol in the rat brain after chronic ethanol exposure. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013;110:14444–14449. Wang L, Hermens DF, Hickie IB, Lagopoulos J. A systematic review of resting-state functional- MRI studies in major depression. J Affect Disord. 2012;142:6–12. 
Zahr NM. Structural and microstructural imaging of the brain in alcohol use disorders. In: Sullivan EV, Pfefferbaum A, eds. Handbook of Clinical Neurology: Alcohol and the Nervous System. Vol 125:257–290. 
Zhang B, Ferman TJ, Boeve BF, et al. MRS in mild cognitive impairment: early differentiation of dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroimag. 2015;25:269–274. 

========804========

▲ 1.17 Radiotracer Imaging with Positron Emission Tomography and Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography: Fundamental Principles, Methodology, and Role in Neuropsychiatric Research 
MARK SLIFSTEIN, PH.D., JOHN H. KRYSTAL, M.D., AND ANISSA ABI-DARGHAM, M.D. 
OVERVIEW 
Radiotracer imaging is a methodology with the unique ability to quantify spatially localized neurochemical information in vivo in the brains of humans and preclinical species. Radiotracers are chemical probes designed to interact with neurochemical systems, either by binding to target molecules such as neuroreceptors, reuptake transporters or intracellular enzymes, or by acting as substrates for the metabolic pathways of endogenous substances in parallel with them. “Tracer” refers to an experimental approach in which a chemical substance containing a quantifiable reporter probe is introduced into a biological system and its interaction with the system is “traced” by the probe. It is implicit that the tracer will be introduced in small enough concentration so that the normal function of the system is not noticeably perturbed by the presence of the tracer itself. Tracer methods were in use for decades before the advent of modern imaging methods and technology. George De Hevesy pioneered the use of radioactive isotopes incorporated in tracers in the mid-20th century to study a wide range of chemical phenomena, including biological systems. Other investigators developed pharmacokinetic models based on tracer methods to quantify processes such as the perfusion of blood in biological tissues, that form the foundation of the pharmacokinetic models used in modern radiotracer imaging, but acquisition of experimental data frequently involved invasive measurements in animals. Approaches that were noninvasive enough to use routinely in living humans did not become available until the late 1970s and 1980s when technological advances in imaging systems and computational power made such methods feasible. In radiotracers, the reporter probe is a radioactive atomic isotope incorporated in a molecule that is designed to interact with a (neuro)biological system. Radioactive isotopes have nuclear configurations that are unstable; individual radioactive atoms decay to a more stable state at unpredictably random times, but when a large number of radioactive atoms are present, the rate of decay at any time is a very well-characterized fraction of the initial rate. There are many different schemes by which radioactive isotopes decay, but all involve the release of energy. Radioactive isotopes used in imaging release, when they decay, high-energy photons (also called γ rays) that readily pass through biological tissue and are then detected in imaging systems external to the body. Photon energy is usually 

========805========

described in units of electron volts (eV, 1 eV = 1.6 × 10−19 Joules, the energy change that an electron would experience when passed through a 1 volt potential difference. 1 keV = 103 eV, 1 MeV = 106 eV), and photons released by isotopes used in imaging range from ~150 keV for some isotopes to 511 keV for others; most materials other than very dense ones, such as lead or the inorganic scintillating crystals used as detectors in imaging systems, are transparent to photons in this energy range. Radioactive atoms are incorporated into a very small portion of the tracer molecules; these are termed labeled molecules, and are assumed to be well mixed within the tracer sample, so that at any given time the rate of decay measured in a location within the tissue will have a known proportionality to the number of unlabeled tracer molecules there. By counting the number of photons that originate in a local volume within the brain over an interval of time, the concentration of the radiotracer in that volume can be inferred. The ability to spatially localize the source of radioactivity requires the use of computational methods known as tomographic reconstruction. The mathematical theory behind tomography was already well established in the early part of the 20th century, but was only practically implemented in the final decades of the century with the advent of fast, powerful computers in combination with the development of electronics and detector materials that could provide the necessary spatial, temporal and energy resolution. There are two imaging modalities that utilize similar experimental methods, but differ in the way photons are counted and the mode of decay of the radioactive isotopes used. These are PET and SPECT. The term emission refers to the fact that the radioactive isotope is part of a molecule that is injected intravenously (or, less frequently, inhaled or ingested) so that the detected photons are emitted from within the body. This is in contrast to transmission imaging such as x-ray and computed tomography (CT) scans in which a beam of photons is directed at the body from an external source and the portion that pass through without interacting with the intervening tissues are counted on the opposite side. Psychiatry researchers have used PET and SPECT imaging to characterize many aspects of neurochemistry in sample cohorts of subjects with many different neuropsychiatric conditions. While the number of radioactive isotopes used in imaging is small, the number of radiotracers that these can be incorporated into, and biochemical systems that can be studied, are virtually limitless, and many different tracers have been used in research studies with human subjects. Currently, in psychiatry these imaging methods are used almost exclusively in research. They do not yet have the sensitivity or specificity to be used diagnostically. Most radiotracer studies in psychiatric populations have based their conclusions on statistical inference from moderately large sample cohorts in which there is considerable overlap in the measured quantities between patients and comparison subjects. But these studies provide important clues to other 

========806========

investigators working in basic neuroscience or drug development about processes that may be pathological in psychiatric conditions and can be examined more closely using in vitro methods or in preclinical species, or that might suggest molecular targets for pharmacotherapy. In this sense, radiotracer imaging is an important translational tool for understanding brain neurochemistry in psychiatric patient populations. In the remainder of this chapter, the physics and technology of imaging, pharmacokinetic models, and experimental designs used in psychiatric imaging research will be described, followed by a survey of the radiotracers, molecular targets, psychiatric populations that have been studied, and some well-replicated results. 
BASIC PHYSICAL PRINCIPLES 
Radioactivity, Radionuclides, and Photon Emission 
Half-Life. As stated above, the time at which any individual radioactive atom will undergo decay is random and unpredictable. However, radiotracer doses contain a very large number of labeled molecules. For example, a typical PET dose contains on the order of 1010 labeled molecules, each of which has the same probability of decay per unit time, independently of all the others. In this setting, the rate, or number of decays per unit time follows an exponential formula, A(t) = A(0)e−λt where A(t), the activity, is the number of decays per unit time at time t, A(0) is the initial activity and λ is a very well-characterized rate constant that is different for each radioactive isotope. The Système International (SI) unit of radioactivity is the Bequerel (Bq), equal to 1 decay per second. An older, though still frequently used unit is the Curie, equal to 3.7 × 1010 decays per second. For the range of activity used in imaging, it is more convenient to use units of MBq (106 Bq) and mCi (10−3 Ci). It is also convenient to factor λ into ln(2)/T1/2, where T1/2, the half-life, is the time it takes for A to decrease to half its initial value. The choice of time and the total activity when the initial measurement A(0) is made does not affect the half-life; following any measurement, the activity will decrease by 50 percent after an additional T1/2 has passed. Half-lives and other parameters for the isotopes most commonly used in PET and SPECT are given in Table 1.17–1. The isotopes used in radiotracer imaging are also referred to as radionuclides. 
Decay by Positron Emission and PET Radionuclides. In decay by positron emission, a proton within the atomic nucleus is converted into a neutron and a positron (and an extremely low mass, uncharged particle called a neutrino). A positron is a particle with the same rest mass as an electron but opposite electric charge. When the positron is ejected from the nucleus, it will have an initial kinetic energy that will be reduced as the particle 

========807========

interacts with the surrounding matter. The sequence of collisions with nearby matter will cause the positron to follow an unpredictable path with many changes of direction and it will usually come to rest within nanoseconds of its release and within 1 to 2 mm of its source atom for the most commonly used PET radionuclides (Table 1.17–1). At that point, the positron and a local electron will be attracted to each other by their opposite charges and undergo an annihilation reaction, in which their masses are converted to energy. Two photons will be produced, each having the energy of the rest mass, 511 keV, of an electron, as the energy from the rest masses of the positron and electron is conserved. The photons travel away from each other in directions that are very nearly opposite to each other (the total momentum is conserved: the momenta of the positron and the electron are nearly zero at the time of the annihilation, and the momenta of the photons are opposite and sum to zero, although the angle is usually slightly different than 180 degrees due to a small amount of residual momentum in the particles at the time of the annihilation event) (Fig. 1.17–1). PET technology exploits the fact that two nearly collinear photons are emitted simultaneously from the location of the annihilation event by utilizing the principle of coincidence detection (see below). The two radionuclides most commonly used in PET brain imaging are 
11Carbon (11C, T1/2 ≅ 20 minutes) and 
18Fluorine 
(18F, T1/2 ≅ 110 minutes). 
15Oxygen (15O, T1/2 ≅ 2 minutes), incorporated in 
15O-labeled 
water, can be used to assess CBF, but its use for this purpose has been mostly superseded by MRI techniques. Also 
13Nitrogen 
(13N, T1/2 ≅ 10 minutes), incorporated in 
13N- labeled ammonia, is used frequently in other areas such as cardiology. Other positron emitters such as 
64Copper 
(64Cu, T1/2 ≅ 12.7 hours) have been used as radionuclides in settings where longer half-lives are desirable, but to date 
64Cu 
has not been applied in neuroimaging. The radionuclides used in PET are not naturally occurring, and their short half-lives place strict constraints on how long before the study, and therefore how far away from the study site, they can be produced and incorporated into radiotracers. Production of PET radionuclides is performed in a particle accelerator called a cyclotron, an instrument that is produced by several medical device manufacturers, but is large, expensive, requires a high level of skill to operate and maintain, and is subject to regulatory scrutiny because it produces radioactivity. Rapid incorporation of the radionuclide in a radiotracer requires elaborate chemistry and quality control instruments and highly skilled chemists to perform these tasks. An approximate rule of thumb is that a radiotracer must be able to be synthesized and undergo tests for sterility and chemical purity in an hour or less to be suitable as a 
11C-labeled 
radiotracer. The use of 
11C 
is therefore restricted to sites that can produce it locally at the time of the PET scan, and PET studies using 
11C 
radiotracers are performed almost exclusively at 

========808========

large academic medical centers that can support the required staffing and equipment. While the requirements for producing 
11C-labeled 
radiotracers are clearly demanding, there are some major advantages to 
11C 
that makes its use very desirable. First, the ubiquity of carbon in virtually all molecules of interest as tracers means that labeling can potentially be performed by substituting 
11C 
for 
12C 
in an organic molecule without altering its biochemical properties. Second, the 20-minute half-life allows for multiple scans on the same day so that scanning can be performed under different experimental conditions on a subject in a single study session. Academic medical centers also routinely produce 
18F-labeled 
radiotracers. There is clearly less time pressure in the production of 
18F-labeled 
tracers than with 11C. 
Additionally, the 110-minute half-life of 
18F 
allows enough of a time window for 
18F 
tracers to be produced by specialized manufacturers with facilities located within several hours traveling time from the study site. Furthermore, 
18F 
labeling is preferable for cases where the pharmacokinetics of the radiotracer require scans of several hours duration, as in this case, 
18F 
will continue to provide a reliable signal for the entire scan duration, whereas 
11C 
activity would become very low leading to unreliable data late in the scan. However, multiple scans cannot be done on the same day in a single subject, due to the confound that would result from activity injected in the first scan being detected in later scans. 
Table 1.17–1. 
Characteristics of Commonly Used PET and SPECT Radionuclides 
T1/2 
Imaging Photon Energy Usual Imaging Mean Positron Range Nuclide (minutes) (keV) Modality (mm) 
11C 
20.4 511 PET 1.1 18F 
109.8 511 PET 0.6 15O 
2.03 511 PET 2.4 123I 
787.8 159 SPECT 
99mTc 
360.4 140 SPECT 

========809========

FIGURE 1.17–1.Schematicrepresentation of the decay of unstable carbon 11 to stable boron. A positron is ejected from the carbon nucleus, eventually colliding with an electron. The pair annihilate and two 511 keV photons are released in opposite directions. Distances are not drawn to scale. 
SPECT Radionuclides. As the name implies, SPECT scanners measure single emitted photons, unlike PET scanners that utilize coincidence detection. In theory, PET radionuclides could be used in SPECT systems, but other radionuclides that also emit photons in a usable energy range and decay with longer half-lives are more practical. A SPECT radionuclide that has proven to be particularly useful for brain imaging is 
123Iodine 
(123I, T1/2 ≅ 13.1 hours). 
123I 
decays by the process of electron capture, in which an orbital electron combines with a proton to form a neutron (plus a neutrino) and a characteristic x-ray photon is emitted when another, outer orbital electron, fills the orbital shell vacated by the transformed electron. There are multiple electron capture decay schemes that 
123I 
can undergo, leading to release of photons of different energies, but approximately 83 percent of decays result in the emission of 159 keV photons, and these are the ones detected by SPECT scanners. 
123I 
can be produced in a cyclotron, but the long half-life allows for 
123I 
or 
123I-labeled 
radiotracers to be distributed within a several thousand mile radius of the manufacturing site. Across all SPECT applications, the most commonly used radionuclide is 99mTechnicium 
(99mTc, T1/2 ≅ 6 hours). 
99mTc 
is a “metastable” product of the decay of 
99Molybdenum 
(99Mo, T1/2 ≅ 66 hours), meaning that its nucleus is in a moderately excited state that will decay to the more stable 99Tc 
form without transmuting to a different element. 
99mTc 
can decay to 

========810========

stable 
99Tc 
by several processes, but approximately 88 percent of decays result in 140 keV photon release, and these photons are detected by SPECT scanners. 
99mTc 
is most commonly distributed to imaging sites in 
99Mo generators, portable devices containing 
99Mo 
produced in large nuclear reactors. The 
99Mo 
decays to 
99mTc 
in the generator and the 
99mTc 
can be separated from 
99Mo 
by chromatographic methods. 
99mTc, 
however, does not readily cross the BBB, whereas 
123I 
does so more easily due to the more lipophilic nature of iodine. As a result, the majority of SPECT radiotracers for brain imaging are 
123I-labeled. 
Physical Principles of Emission Tomography 
Gamma Ray Detection. The same tissue penetrating property that makes the 511 keV photons emitted in PET and the 140 to 159 keV photons emitted in SPECT useful for imaging leads to the necessity for special materials to detect and transduce their energy into a form more amenable to processing by the electronic systems that count them. Detectors in PET and SPECT are dense inorganic scintillating crystals that interact with, that is, stop, the high-energy photons resulting from radioactive decay and emit a portion of the absorbed energy in the form of lower energy photons in the visible to UV range. The most commonly used scintillator in SPECT is thallium-doped sodium iodide (NaI(Tl)). Many scintillating detectors have been used in PET; some of the most frequently used ones are bismuth germinate (BGO), lutetium oxyorthosilicate (LSO), and lutetium yttrium orthosilicate (LYSO). Each has different properties that are more optimal for some applications than others. 
After the scintillator releases its lower energy photons, the next stage in signal transduction for both PET and SPECT is to convert that signal into an electrical current that represents the detected event in the electronic circuits that perform the remainder of the activity counting process. This component is called the photosensor, and the most commonly used photosensor is the photomultiplier tube (PMT). PMTs are evacuated glass tubes with a light-sensitive material on the end that interfaces with the scintillator (the cathode) and a sequence of metal plates (dynodes) along the length of the tube that are maintained at successively higher voltages. Light striking the cathode will induce electrons to leave the surface and strike the nearest dynode, inducing more electrons to break free from that plate and strike the next one. The cascade continues, with enough amplification of the electron stream by the last stage (the anode) to form a current in the range that is suitable for the next stage of the electronics (Fig. 1.17–2). Common configurations for detectors and PMTs in PET are rectangular blocks of detector material attached to a small number of PMTs. The blocks are assembled into polygonal rings that surround the imaging field of view (Fig. 1.17–3), and a number of rings are assembled concentrically to form a cylindrical imaging gantry. Similar designs are 

========811========

feasible in SPECT, but more commonly, SPECT scanners contain several large slabs of detector materials attached to large arrays of PMT that rotate around the subject to obtain data from all angles (Fig. 1.17–3). Recently, there has been a great deal of interest in developing solid-state photosensors to replace PMTs, driven largely by the development of hybrid PET-MR scanners (see below). PMTs interact with, and do not operate properly in, the strong magnetic fields generated by MRI scanners, whereas solid-state photosensors can operate in that environment. Two designs that have been studied extensively are called avalanche photodiodes (APMs) and APMs operating in Geiger mode (referred to as silicon photomultipliers, SiPMs). APMs are used in the PET-MR hybrid scanners currently produced by commercial manufacturers. As the technology of APMs and SiPMs becomes more standardized and less expensive, they will have the potential to greatly impact the design and capabilities of future scanners. 
FIGURE 1.17–2. Representation of a detector block with scintillator crystal attached to an array of photomultiplier tubes (left) and a photomultiplier tube (right). 
Coincidence Detection in PET. In PET, radioactive decay events are recorded when two 511 keV photons strike two detectors simultaneously. The path between the two detectors is referred to as a line of response (LOR). An electronic circuit detects if two photon arrival events occur within a very narrow time interval called a coincidence timing window. The coincidence timing windows on modern scanners are in the range of 3 to 6 nanoseconds. Each detected coincidence event causes a computer to increment the count total for that LOR by one unit (Fig. 1.17–3). 
Photon Detection in SPECT by Collimation. In SPECT, decay events are localized to an LOR by use of lead collimators. These are usually formed from blocks of lead that are attached to the detectors and have long narrow channels that only allow photons from a narrow set of angles with respect to the detector to pass through. The simplest design utilizes parallel cylindrical channels, all of which are perpendicular to the flat face of the detector, but many different configurations are in use with different 

========812========

scanner designs and different image reconstruction algorithms. The necessity for collimation in SPECT causes its scanners to utilize a smaller portion of the photons that are emitted from radioactive decay than PET scanners. The overall efficiency with which scanners convert radioactivity in the field of view to detected counts is referred to as sensitivity. Because of collimation, SPECT systems have lower sensitivity than PET systems. 
FIGURE 1.17–3.APETringdetector(left)witharepresentationofacoincidencetiming circuit and a 3-headed gamma camera for SPECT (right). In PET, an electronic pulse generator sends a signal to a coincidence detection circuit. If two pulses are detected within a coincidence timing window from two detectors, an event is counted on the LOR between them. In SPECT, photon detections are restricted to LORs defined by the collimators. The detector arrays rotate around the imaged object. 
FIGURE 1.17–4. Depiction of backprojection. A point source of activity is placed in the upper left quadrant of the field of view. The top row and bottom left panel depict three different LORs and their locations in the sinogram of the point source. The bottom right panel shows the result of backprojecting all LORs; the only ones that are nonzero are those that pass through the location of the point source. 
Image Reconstruction 

========813========

The data obtained with both PET and SPECT are called projection data. For each LOR, a single number is recorded that contains counts from all loci along the LOR. Conversely, as the direction in which photons are released following a decay event is random, each location in the imaging field of view that contains activity will contribute counts to several, possibly many, LORs. The LOR data contain enough information to reconstruct a facsimile of the original distribution of decay events, but this requires the application of mathematical models of the projection data and numerical implementations of the models on computers. There are two general approaches to reconstruction: filtered backprojection (FBP) and iterative reconstruction. Both involve some degree of mathematical complexity, and there are many variants of each. Below, only the general concepts of both methods are described, not specific implementations. The projection data are stored as a numerical array called a sinogram, which is organized by angle and radial distance from the origin (the center of the field of view). For each angle θ and distance d, the value recorded in the sinogram at the point (θ, d) is the number of detected events (the counts) in the LOR that is perpendicular to the line through the origin at angle θ and passes through that line at distance d from the origin (Fig. 1.17–4). The name sinogram derives from the fact that an object with radioactivity only at a single spatial point would be recorded as a sine wave in the (θ, d) representation. The reconstructed image is usually represented with Cartesian coordinates in a rectangular grid of pixels (in two dimensions) or voxels (for “volume element” in three dimensions). 
Filtered Backprojection. FBP, sometimes called analytic reconstruction, was the most common approach to image reconstruction from the inception of CT up until the early 2000s, partly because the iterative methods, which appeared in several published papers in the 1980s, were too computationally intensive, and therefore too slow for the computers of that time period. Iterative reconstruction programs, which lead to visually clearer reconstructed images, are now routinely provided as part of the software package with commercially produced scanners, but many researchers still prefer FBP reconstruction due to statistical issues described below. The basic equations of FBP are derived from mathematical formulas called the Radon transform and the inverse Radon transform, theoretical constructs first described in the early part of the 20th century explaining the relationship between a mathematical function defined in two dimensional space, that is, f(x,y) which defines a single numerical value for each (x,y) pair of Cartesian coordinates, and its projections. FBP is a discretized version of the inverse Radon transform; that is, a version based on a finite number of LORs rather than a full continuum of angles and distances from the origin. The first step can be thought of as overlaying the projections from all the LORs and summing 

========814========

(Fig. 1.17–4). This step is called backprojection. Because the loci that contain radioactivity contribute to all the LORs that pass through them, the backprojected data will have elevated intensities in these positions. However, pure backprojection would also attribute activity along each entire LOR containing counts, so an adjustment called spatial filtering is applied prior to backprojection to remove the starburst-like artifact that would otherwise result (Fig. 1.17–5). This is a conceptual description of FBP; real implementations use more sophisticated computer algorithms and mathematical procedures such as Fourier transforms. The main advantage of FBP is that it is fast. However, there are disadvantages. The filtering step and the fact that there are a finite number of LORs combine to reduce spatial resolution and introduce so-called streak artifacts (Fig. 1.17– 6). 
Iterative Reconstruction. A number of algorithms have been proposed that treat the relationship between projection data and voxel values probabilistically by framing reconstruction as a statistical estimation problem. These treat the voxel values as a sample drawn from a probability distribution and seek to estimate the most probable distribution of counts in voxels, given the measured projection data and the known physical properties of the imaging system such as the detector geometry. They are called iterative because they start with an arbitrary estimate of the voxel values and then successively improve the estimate by updating a formula that takes the current estimate as input and returns an improved estimate as output. Each cycle through the procedure is called an iteration. The iterative algorithm that is available in the software packages provided by most commercial scanner manufacturers is called ordered subset expectation maximization (OSEM), a modified version of the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. EM and OSEM are based on the maximum likelihood (ML) principle. ML estimation procedures are statistical methods that establish formulas to estimate the parameters in a parametric probability distribution from observed sample data. For example, the conventional formula for estimating the mean μ of a Gaussian random variable as the sample average can be derived from the ML principle. The Likelihood is the formula for the probability of the observed sample data, expressed as a function of these data and the parameters of the distribution. As the name suggests, ML methods seek the value of the parameter(s) that maximizes the Likelihood of the observed data. Voxel data are usually modeled as Poisson random variables; the Poisson distribution can take on only nonnegative integer values and has a single parameter λ, the mean of the distribution. In the EM and OSEM approaches, counts emanating from each voxel are treated as statistically independent of every other voxel. The mean or expected value of the counts at voxel j is assumed to be λj, the parameter of the Poisson distribution for 

========815========

that voxel. These, however, are hidden variables, because the observed data are the projection data on LORs. The EM algorithm is designed to obtain the ML parameter estimate for the distribution of a hidden variable when only incomplete data, such as the projection data, are available. For the particular case of projection data and the assumed Poisson distribution of voxel values, the procedure leads to a simple and elegant formula that is guaranteed to converge, over the course of successive iterations, to the set {λj} of ML estimates of voxel means. However, the full Poisson EM algorithm requires a huge number of computations, given the large number of LORs and voxels in PET and SPECT image data, and was therefore not practical to apply on the computers available at the time the EM algorithm was proposed. The OSEM algorithm is a modified version introduced in the 1990s that made iterative reconstruction feasible. By cleverly ordering the full set of LOR data into a sequence of smaller subsets and updating the voxel estimates based on computations performed on each successive subset rather than only once after each complete iteration through all the LORs, fewer equations need to be solved and the necessary number of iterations, and therefore the computational load, is reduced significantly. Unlike full EM, OSEM is not guaranteed to converge to the ML estimate of the voxel values, but practical experience has shown that it leads to very satisfactory image reconstructions after a fixed, small number of iterations (Fig. 1.17–6). The main advantage of OSEM reconstruction is that it leads to clearer images without streak artifacts or the level of random noise that is seen in FBP reconstruction (Fig. 1.17–6). A disadvantage is that, following necessary preliminary corrections to the sinogram data prior to reconstruction for several noise sources that occur, especially in PET, the Poisson distribution assumptions are not completely satisfied, and this can lead to bias in which the true proportionality between brain regions with high and low activity is not preserved, although the bias is relatively small. For this reason, many neuroimaging researchers, who are more interested in quantification than visual presentation, prefer FBP to OSEM. 

========816========

FIGURE 1.17–5.Filteredbackprojection.TheobjectisaShepp-Loganphantom,asetof superimposed ellipses of different intensities used as a standard for comparing reconstruction algorithms. There are several different filters that can be used. The one used here is called a ramp filter. 

========817========

FIGURE 1.17–6. Comparison between FBP (left) and OSEM (right). The image is summed data from a 120 minute [11C]MDL100907 scan, shown in transverse (top) and coronal (bottom) views. The radiotracer binds to the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. The summed image represents a combination of distribution of the tracer throughout the brain during the early part of the scan and specific binding to receptors in the later part. Streak artifacts are visible in the FBP, especially in the space between scalp and brain. The FBP reconstruction also has a more mottled appearance than the OSEM reconstruction. 
Factors Affecting Image Quantification and Image Quality 
The sections above describing the release and subsequent detection of photons are idealized in the sense that it is assumed that 100 percent of photons pass through biological tissue without any interaction and that 100 percent of photons or coincident pairs striking the detectors are perfectly converted into detected counts. In reality, there is some interaction between photons and tissue, LORs are not really lines but three- dimensional columns in which the probability of detection is greater at the center than toward the edges, and electronics have finite limits to their temporal and energy resolution. These factors and others degrade the overall image quality and spatial resolution; some severely enough to 

========818========

require corrective procedures to be applied prior to the reconstruction phase. 
Photon Attenuation. While many of the photons from radioactive decay do pass through tissue unimpeded, a fraction of them do not. For γ rays in the energy range of those released by PET and SPECT isotopes and matter like biological tissue, the majority of interactions are due to Compton scattering, in which the photon collides with an atom and is deflected from its original path, with some of its energy absorbed by an orbital electron from the atom. Less frequently, the photon is completely absorbed in the collision and the atom ejects an electron, a process called photoelectric effect. The reduction in detected photons due to these interactions is called attenuation. The probability of attenuation decreases with increasing γ ray energy, and increases with the density and thickness of the intervening matter between the photon source and the detector. For a given kind of matter such as soft tissue, the probability that a photon passes through without being attenuated is an exponential function of the depth of the tissue where the photon is released; the probability is proportional to e−μd where d is the depth in centimeters and μ is the linear attenuation coefficient of the material in units of cm−1. The attenuation in air is nearly zero, so only the thickness of the tissue is a factor in attenuation, not the total distance to the detectors. The linear coefficient μ is a function of both the energy of the photon and the nature of the material through which the photon is passing; the larger μ is, the greater the attenuation. Because PET photons have higher energy than SPECT photons, they will undergo less attenuation. For example, μ in water for 511 keV photons is 0.097 cm−1, whereas for 150 keV photons it is approximately 0.15 cm−1, and μ in soft tissue is similar to μ in water. Without correction for attenuation, voxels located deep in tissue would have lower detected counts than voxels closer to the surface having the same concentration of radiotracer. Therefore, attenuation correction is a necessary step in quantitative imaging. The fact that PET utilizes coincidence detection allows the implementation of a very accurate form of attenuation correction. This is because the probability of either photon from an annihilation not being attenuated is independent of whether or not the other is attenuated, and therefore the probability of both photons not being attenuated is the product of their probabilities; it is proportional to e −μd1e−μd2 
= e−μ(d1+d2) that depends only on the total length of tissue, d1 + d2, traversed by the LOR, and does not depend on the location within the LOR where the annihilation event occurs (Fig. 1.17–7). Attenuation correction in PET is usually applied to the sinogram prior to reconstruction by multiplying the value of each LOR by a correction factor measured in a separate scan called a transmission scan. In dedicated PET systems, this is 

========819========

usually performed by rotating a point source or a rod containing multiple point sources of a positron emitting material of known activity around the measured object (the subject’s head) and recording the fraction of activity detected on the opposite side. Different approaches are required for hybrid PET-CT and PET-MR scanners (see below). In single photon detection as in SPECT, other strategies must be employed. While some sophisticated algorithms for measuring attenuation using a transmission source have been devised for application in SPECT, uniform attenuation correction is most frequently applied. In this approach, an image of an elliptical object with voxel values equal to the correction factors for water is aligned to the reconstructed SPECT image and the values in the two images are multiplied on a voxel by voxel basis. 
FIGURE 1.17–7. Attenuation. The ellipse in the center represents a hypothetical object (i.e., a head) in the field of view. In SPECT, the photon traveling to the left would have the probability proportional to e−μd1 of not being attenuated and the one traveling to the right would have probability proportional to e−μd2 of not being attenuated. In PET, the coincidence event along this LOR would have probability proportional to e−μ(d1+d2) regardless of where along the LOR it originated. 
Photon Scatter. Compton scattered photons are not absorbed in the tissue completely, but rather, change their trajectory and continue at reduced energy. The direction of change is random, and the reduction in energy increases as the angle of deflection increases. In PET imaging, the scattered photon and its partner will arrive at two detectors within a coincidence timing window and therefore the annihilation event will be misattributed to an LOR that does not pass through the true location. In SPECT imaging, the photon will be misread as a photon emanating along an LOR from the location of the scattering event in the scattered direction. In both modalities, detector circuitry can discriminate photon energy and reject low-energy photons to some degree, but there is enough overlap between the range of accepted energies and the energies of scattered photons such that many scattered photons are counted as true decay events. Scatter adds random noise unrelated to the true radiotracer distribution and would degrade the image quality considerably if not corrected. There have been many scatter correction methods proposed and implemented. Modern scanners incorporate sophisticated software algorithms that utilize information from the attenuation map generated 

========820========

from the transmission image to make probabilistic models of the scatter distribution, which are subtracted from sinogram data prior to reconstruction. 
Random Coincidences in PET. An additional source of noise specific to PET is accidental, or random, coincidences. These arise when two photons from distinct annihilation events arrive at two detectors within a coincidence timing window, and are counted as an annihilation event along the LOR connecting the two detectors. Random coincidences are uniformly distributed across the field of view, and cause an artifact of elevated background activity level, roughly in proportion to the square of the singles rate (the rate at which individual photons are detected). As with scatter, random coincidences would considerably degrade the image quality if not addressed. Most scanners have a delayed coincidence timing channel, an electronic circuit that allows estimation of random coincidences by purposely counting pairs of detected photons as coincidence events that arrive several nanoseconds further apart than a coincidence timing window and are therefore known not to have originated from the same annihilation event. The estimated random coincidences are subtracted from sinogram data prior to any other processing. In regions of the field of view where there is no, or very low, true activity, this step can lead to apparent negative counts. 
Spatial Resolution. All imaging systems have characteristic spatial resolutions and indices of the smallest object dimensions that they can distinguish. Resolution in PET and SPECT systems is limited by physical characteristics of the scanner, such as the finite width of LORs (as opposed to infinitesimally thin lines) or the fact that projection data are measured at a finite number of angles and distances from the origin at each angle, rather than the full continuum of angle and length values. Resolution limiting factors specific to PET are the range of positrons and the fact that the annihilation events are only localized to within a sphere of 1 to 2 mm radius from the sites of the decay, and that the angle between released photons is not identically 180 degree. Resolution in SPECT is limited by collimator design and distance of the imaged object from the collimators. Resolution of imaging systems is measured empirically, by imaging radioactive sources of standard shapes and characterizing the accuracy of the image. If a small point source or a thin line source of activity is placed in the field of view, the reconstructed image spreads in a bell-shaped curve around the point or line called the point spread function (PSF) or the line spread function (LSF). Resolution is usually reported as the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the PSF. This is the length, in millimeters, between the two points at which the value of the PSF is half of it maximum, central value (Fig. 1.17–8). The PSF and FWHM are usually not constant 

========821========

across the field of view; they vary slightly with position, but are typically reported as one, average number. They are also dependent on the method of image reconstruction applied; performance evaluation reports are usually conducted using standardized methods to facilitate comparisons across scanners and reports. Most modern production PET scanners have FWHM in the range of 4 to 5 mm. Some specialized PET scanners have FWHM in the range of 2 to 3 mm. Resolution in SPECT is dependent on the collimator system in use. Clinical, rotating head SPECT scanners have FWHM in the range 10 to 12 mm. Specialized small animal SPECT scanners, that can exploit the close proximity of the animal to the collimator and use special collimator designs, can have submillimeter FWHM. Images are usually reconstructed with voxel dimensions that are smaller than the FWHM to avoid having a checkerboard-like or pixelated appearance. As a result, each voxel will contain overlapping information from the voxels that are adjacent to it. 
Hybrid Imaging Systems 
In the years since 2000, scanner manufacturers have begun producing multimodal scanners having a PET or SPECT component combined with an additional imaging system such as CT or magnetic resonance (MR). The adaptations necessary to use these systems and their potential to expand the information obtained in the context of neuroimaging are briefly described. 
FIGURE 1.17–8. Schematic representation of a PSF from a point source of activity at the center of the horizontal axis. 

========822========

PET-CT and SPECT-CT. A CT system is mounted along the same axis as the PET or SPECT system. The CT and radionuclide imaging are performed in sequence, not simultaneously, as the locations of the imaging detectors for the two systems are different. Very accurate coregistration of the images is possible because the distance between the patient positions for the two modalities is known precisely and can be used for image fusion in which the neurochemical information from the radiotracer image is superimposed on the more anatomically precise, high-resolution CT image. This has proven to be very valuable for imaging of the chest or abdomen, as organs are easily identifiable on CT images but not on PET or SPECT images. It is of less value for brain imaging, because CT images do not distinguish between soft tissue types. MRIs, however, do distinguish between gray matter, white matter and CSF, and MRI is therefore a preferable modality for anatomical coregistration and structure identification. Frequently in neuroimaging studies, MRIs will be obtained in a separate session and coregistration will be performed by software methods. PET-CT and SPECT- CT systems utilize the CT scan as transmission scan for attenuation correction. An advantage of this use is the high signal to noise ratio obtainable in the CT images. The photons from CT scanners are x-rays spread over a relatively broad energy spectrum from ~40 to 140 keV. These have different (higher) attenuation than the higher energy photons from PET or SPECT and require use of a lookup table method to transform their μ values into appropriate values for the other modalities. 
PET-MR. PET-MR scanners are now being commercially produced. Unlike PET-CT, the PET and MRI components are concentric and images are acquired simultaneously. For whole body imaging, the main advantages are the ability to obtain anatomical images without the additional radiation burden of CT, and reduced overall imaging time. For neuroimaging, there is the potential, in addition to the anatomical information from the MR, to simultaneously utilize other MR techniques such as perfusion imaging or BOLD fMRI, greatly expanding the experimental information that can be obtained in a single imaging session. An ongoing technical challenge is attenuation correction. The concentric scanner ring design and the current size of the components from both modalities preclude the inclusion of rod or point sources of radioactivity used for conventional transmission scans. However, the MRIs, while providing very precise anatomical information about brain tissue, provide no direct information about attenuation of high- energy photons. Additionally, skull bone and other materials in the PET field of view such as the patient bed or the MRI radiofrequency coil (which is outside the MR field of view) that do attenuate photons are not detected with MRI (skull can be detected using special fast echo radiofrequency pulse sequences, but these are not yet widely available). Current approaches for brain imaging involve coregistering acquired MRIs to 

========823========

standard atlases and using standardized μ values from lookup tables. Other, simpler methods, such as fat/water tissue segmentation algorithms in which each voxel is assigned to a tissue type with a standardized μ value, have proven adequate for whole body scanning. Attenuation correction in PET-MR is currently an active area of research; improvements and refinements can be expected as the technology matures and interest grows. 
Safety 
Radiation Exposure and Internal Dosimetry. Radioactive decay leads to deposition of energy in tissue when positrons, electrons, or photons interact with molecules in tissues. While the type and amounts of radiation that PET and SPECT research subjects are exposed to are very unlikely to lead to acute effects, the long-term impact and the possibility of genetic damage are less well understood. Risk/benefit considerations have led governments and international advisory groups to propose guidelines and regulations for exposure limits to research subjects. These are based on the linear nonthreshold model that assumes observations made at much higher exposures with qualitatively different radiation can be extrapolated to the levels that research subjects are exposed to in PET and SPECT studies. There is not currently a consensus among radiation biologists as to the validity of this assumption, but in the absence of definitive data a conservative approach has been adapted. In the United States, there are FDA regulations limiting maximum radiation exposure to research subjects. Other countries are guided by the recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP). The amount of energy deposited in any organ or part of the body is a complicated function of the tissue type, the form of the organ, the isotope, and the distribution of the radiotracer throughout the body. The estimated radiation exposure associated with a radiotracer is most often determined through a combination of mathematical models, computer simulations, and test scans known collectively as internal dosimetry studies. The distribution of the radiolabel throughout the body will differ between radiotracers according to how the tracer is metabolized and cleared, and this is determined empirically by acquiring whole body scans, either in a small cohort of human subjects or in animals with application of scaling factors to account for size differences between species. Organ radiation doses are calculated as weighted sums of the energy due to decays occurring in the organ itself and the energy deposited in it from decay events originating in other parts of the body. The unit of absorbed dose is the Gray (Gy, joules per kg tissue). An older unit is the radiation absorbed dose (rad, 1 rad = 0.01 Gy). Exposure is usually reported as absorbed dose per injected unit of radioactivity, such as mGy/MBq (1 mGy = 10−3 Gy) or rad/mCi. In the ICRP guidelines, absorbed doses are multiplied by an additional quality 

========824========

factor that accounts for the type of radiation, leading to different units (the guidelines also apply to workers with occupational exposures to more damaging types of radioactivity than used in PET and SPECT). After multiplication by the quality factors, Gy are transformed to units called Sieverts (Sv), and rads become Roentgen-equivalent man (rem); however, the quality factors are all equal to 1 for the types of radiation from PET and SPECT isotopes so that Sv are numerically equivalent to Gy and rems are numerically equivalent to rads. The weighting coefficients used to calculate the radiation dose to each organ as a sum of contributions of activity originating from all organs are derived from tables generated through detailed computer simulations that account for organ shape, size, composition, and distance from other organs in mathematical models of humans of different sizes, ages, and sexes. The FDA regulations are based on the concept of the critical organ, in which the total allowable radiation per study is limited by the absorbed radiation dose to the single organ with the highest exposure. The ICRP guidelines are based on weighted averages of doses to a predetermined set of organs. There have been multiple revisions of these guidelines and the names and definitions of the weighted sums. The names have been somewhat confusingly similar (Dose Equivalent, Effective Dose, Equivalent Dose, Effective Dose Equivalent, etc.) but the standard as of ICRP Publication 103 (2007) is the Effective Dose (E, Sv) equal to a weighted sum of absorbed doses from 28 specified organs and tissues. While the precise dose limits differ from tracer to tracer, several scans per subject per study can be performed with most radiotracers while remaining within the allowable exposure range. 
Pharmacological Toxicity. Compounds that are administered to human research subjects must undergo extensive toxicology screening prior to approval. The low mass dose usually administered to research subjects, in the range of several μg or less, generally keeps the dose many orders of magnitude lower than the level at which physiological effects are noticed. This is especially true of radiotracers that are neuroreceptor antagonists. At tracer doses, these maximally occupy several percent of the receptors, well below the amount necessary for pharmacological effects on neurotransmission. However, some agonist radiotracers have been known to elicit a pharmacological response even at very low mass doses. Two examples are the μ-opioid agonist [11C]carfentanil, which can cause sedation and hypoventilation at μg doses, and the dopamine D2/D3 receptor agonist [11C]-(+)-PHNO, which can cause transient nausea several minutes after a bolus injection. 
PHARMACOKINETIC MODELS AND METHODS, EXPERIMENTAL DESIGNS General Framework and Compartment Models 

========825========

Above, some of the physical and image processing theory, technology, and algorithms used to create a PET or SPECT image were described. From the experimenter’s perspective, all these components lead to one key characteristic of the imaging data that makes quantitative neuroimaging feasible: in each spatial location within the image, the measured amount of activity is proportional to the concentration of the tracer at that location. These measured amounts can be extracted as the average activity over a well-defined brain region of interest that can be as large as thousands of voxels or as small as a single voxel. Imaging data can then be statistically fitted to mathematical models of the observed biological processes, and parameter estimates can be derived to quantitatively characterize the processes. The imaging data can range from single, static snap shots of the tracer distribution obtained from 10 to 20 minutes of scanning, to sequential dynamic images that record the kinetic profile of the tracer over the course of hours. The mathematical models can range from simple measurements of the ratio of radiotracer concentrations in different tissues, to detailed differential equation models that relate the pharmacokinetic profile of the brain concentration of the radiotracer over hours to the concentration in arterial blood plasma, collected in parallel with the brain images over the same time period. The radiotracer enters the brain from the bloodstream, and the most comprehensive models combine an equation for transport across the BBB with equations for the interaction of the radiotracer with biological processes of interest in brain tissue; simpler models can sometimes be derived from these if appropriate conditions are met. The transport equation is usually based on Fick’s principle, in which the net rate of influx or efflux across the BBB is proportional to the gradient in radiotracer concentrations between brain tissue and blood. Models of biological processes can be broadly categorized according to whether the radiotracer is a ligand that binds reversibly to a target molecule, or is a substrate for a metabolic pathway and becomes irreversibly trapped at some stage. A general, flexible framework that encompasses the reversible and irreversible cases is the compartment model (Fig. 1.17–9). A compartment model describes radiotracer kinetics with a simple set of rules, in which states of the radiotracer are represented as compartments, drawn as boxes, and changes of state are represented as flow between compartments, denoted by arrows showing allowable directions of flow between compartments, at rates that are proportional to the tracer concentration in the source compartment. Corresponding to the compartment diagram is a system of differential equations describing the rates. Outcome measures containing relevant biological or pharmacokinetic information are formed as functions of the rate constants. The rate constants are unknown parameters; they are estimated by using a computer-based data fitting procedure that provides the best fit of the model to the measured PET or SPECT data. The most common criterion for 

========826========

best fit is least squares minimization, in which the program searches through the entire plausible range of rate constants and finds the ones that minimize the sum of the squared differences between the measured data, recorded as discrete “frames” at a sequence of time points over the course of the scan, and the model predictions at these time points, although many data fitting and parameter extraction procedures are in use in addition to the conventional least squares approach. 
FIGURE 1.17–9. Some of the mathematics of compartment models. The box representations (left) for reversible and irreversible 2TC models. The center column shows the associated differential equations. These are derived by the simple rules that the overall rate of change of a compartment is a weighted sum of all source compartment concentrations (ones with arrows pointing into it) minus a weighted sum of the compartment concentration itself if the compartment is reversible (arrows pointing out of it). The weights are the rate constants, labeled K1, k2, k3, and k4. The right column shows outcome measures. For the reversible tracers, all outcome measures are equilibrium ratios of concentrations. Because they are equilibrium ratios, the rates of change of each compartment (the left side of the equations in the center column) are 0, and the concentration ratios can be derived as functions of the rate constants. For the irreversible model, the steady-state representation of CPRE can be derived in a similar way, and then substitution into the differential equation for the rate of accumulation of CM leads to a rate constant expression for Kin. 
Reversible Models. Reversibly binding tracers are used most frequently to quantify receptor, transporter, enzyme, or other protein density in brain. These tracers are also referred to as radioligands. The modeled processes for reversible radioligand binding are bimolecular association between the radioligand and target protein and unimolecular dissociation of the target–ligand complex. The differential equation for this process is the mass action law. The canonic compartment model applied to reversible radioligands is the two-tissue compartment model (2TC, Fig. 1.17–9). The 2TC model requires that the concentration of radiotracer in arterial plasma be measured during the scan as an input to the model. This is invasive, as it requires arterial catheterization, and technically demanding, as it requires application of chromatography to estimate the fraction of radioactivity in blood that is due to unmetabolized radioligand rather than radiolabeled metabolites that form in the periphery and 

========827========

accumulate in the blood over the course of the scan. For some radiotracers, there are methods for estimating relevant parameters that do not require an arterial plasma input function, but even these are often conceptually derived from the 2TC, highlighting its central role in models of reversible tracers. There are two main simplifying assumptions in the 2TC. When the radioligand crosses the BBB, it is initially in a free, unbound state. From the free state, it can associate specifically with the target protein it was designed to bind to, or, it can loosely bind to membranes nonspecifically. Specific binding is characterized by certain properties: it is saturable (it cannot exceed the concentration of the available target protein regardless of how high the ligand concentration is) and it is displaceable by other ligands that bind to the same site. Conversely, nonspecific binding is not saturable and not displaceable. Also, compared to the rate of the specific binding process, free and nonspecifically bound radiotracers equilibrate rapidly. The first simplifying assumption is that this equilibration occurs instantaneously, so that free and nonspecifically bound radiotracers are combined into a single compartment called the nondisplaceable compartment (CND). Only the free fraction of CND, denoted fND, is able to bind specifically to the target molecule. The bound state is the specific binding compartment (CS). The second simplification is called the tracer dose approximation. The bimolecular association term of the mass action law contains the product of the unbound target protein concentration and the free radiotracer concentration. The tracer dose approximation is that the concentration of radioligand is so low that at most several percent of the target is bound, and therefore the target concentration can be treated as if it is constant. To satisfy the tracer dose approximation condition, very low mass, usually several micrograms or less, of radioligand are injected. This also limits the possibility that the radiotracer will pharmacologically perturb the system under study. In theory, models could be formed that do not include these simplifications—free and nonspecifically bound tracer could be treated as separate compartments and the equations of the full mass action law without the tracer dose assumption could be implemented, but experience has proven the 2TC model to be the most comprehensive model that is also robust and stable enough for reliable parameter estimation. The two compartments, CND and CS represent states that are occurring simultaneously in the same voxels and cannot be separated in the image. Only their sum, CT = CND + CS (T for Total concentration) can be observed; the relationship between CND and CS must be inferred through the model. Concentration of the radiotracer in arterial plasma is denoted CP. There are two types of related outcome measures derivable from the 2TC model. These are distribution volumes and binding potentials. These represent equilibrium ratios of radiotracer concentrations under tracer dose conditions (Fig. 1.17–9), but they are rarely estimated under 

========828========

equilibrium conditions. Rather, they are derived from dynamic scan data, usually acquired following a bolus injection of the radiotracer, as functions of the estimated rate constants. Some of the mathematics leading to the derived relationships between distribution volumes and rate constants are provided in greater detail in the legend to Figure 1.17–9. Distribution volumes represent equilibrium ratios between tracer concentration in compartments and tracer concentration in arterial plasma. For the 2TC model, there are three relevant distribution volumes: VND = CND/CP, VS = CS/CP, and VT = VND + VS. Binding potentials are parameters that are proportional to the ratio of specifically bound to free radiotracer at equilibrium. There are several forms of binding potential with different constants of proportionality, resulting from different ways of approximating the free concentration, but the version that is frequently reported in PET and SPECT studies is BPND, the ratio CS/CND at equilibrium. From the distribution volume definitions, BPND can be seen to equal VS/VND. Physiologically, BPND is equivalent to fNDBMAX/KD, where BMAX (nM) is the concentration of target protein. Receptor studies report this as BAVAIL to emphasize the fact that that some portion of the total concentration BMAX may not be available to bind to the radiotracer due to phenomena such as baseline receptor occupancy by the endogenous neurotransmitter or trafficking of receptors between the cell surface and cytoplasm. KD (nM) is the equilibrium dissociation constant (reciprocal of the affinity). From the equilibrium definition CS/CND, it is apparent that BPND is a ratio of specific binding, the quantity of most interest, to nondisplaceable concentration, which incorporates nonspecific binding, essentially a nuisance variable. For this reason, BPND is sometimes thought of as a signal to noise ratio. In studies where CP is measured, VT can be estimated in all brain regions. BPND can be estimated through use of the 2TC model provided there is a reference tissue, a brain region with negligible target protein concentration (Fig. 1.17–10). In a reference tissue, VT = VND. An additional assumption applied in all compartment models that is well supported by data to within experimental error is that VND is the same in all brain tissues, so that VT in the reference tissue provides an estimate of VND throughout the brain (Fig. 1.17–10). A particularly robust way to estimate BPND in all brain regions is through distribution volumes as [VT(region) – VT(reference tissue)]/VT(reference tissue). Also, if there is a reference tissue, there are mathematical models that eliminate the arterial plasma concentration CP from the equations and estimate BPND directly from the relationship between the target-rich brain regions and the reference tissue; these allow BPND estimation without the requirement for arterial blood samples. 

========829========

FIGURE 1.17–10. Time activity curves and 2TC fit at baseline and after receptor blockade. The data are from [11C]raclopride scans, a dopamine D2-like receptor tracer, in a nonhuman primate at baseline (left) and following D2 receptor blockade with haloperidol (right). The figure illustrates several aspects of 2TC models. Distribution volumes (VT) at baseline are 3.9 in striatum, 1.4 in thalamus, and 1.0 in cerebellum. Using cerebellum VT as an estimate of VND leads to BPND = 2.9 in striatum and 0.4 in thalamus. Following receptor blockade, all regions appear similar to cerebellum and all VT are close to 1, illustrating the concept that VT in the reference tissue, cerebellum, provides a good estimate for VND in regions containing receptors. 
Experimental Designs for Reversible Models. The most direct application of reversible models is the comparison of target protein density across groups or conditions. If the assumption is made that KD and fND do not differ, on average, between scans being compared, then BPND can be taken to represent differences in BMAX or BAVAIL. Another flexible paradigm that can model many different phenomena is to compare the relative change in BPND across conditions within subjects, sometimes denoted as ∆BPND: ∆BPND = [BPND(condition 2) – BPND(condition 1)]/BPND(condition 1). The most common applications are those in which condition 1 is a baseline measurement and condition 2 is a scan following a pharmacological challenge that perturbs the system. Stimulant challenges induce an endogenous ligand for the binding site, such as a neurotransmitter in the case of receptor binding, to be released and compete with the radioligand for binding sites. Another example is a depletion paradigm, in which the challenge prevents or reduces synthesis of the endogenous substance that normally binds to the site under baseline conditions, leading to the unmasking of the underlying BMAX or BAVAIL. ∆BPND also provides an estimate of the target fraction, or percent occupancy, attained by an exogenously administered drug. In the simplest case when there is only a single competing ligand occupying some portion of the target molecules in condition 2 and no competitors in condition 1, BPND will be reduced by the factor 1/(1+[L]/KDL) where [L] is the 

========830========

concentration of the competitor and KDL is the equilibrium dissociation constant of L for the target. The factor 1/(1+[L]/KDL), equals 1 – occupancy, where occupancy is the fraction of the target concentration occupied at equilibrium by L at concentration [L]. Therefore, ∆BPND provides an estimate of the target occupancy attained by the competitor L, and PET imaging has become an important tool in the drug development and characterization of existing drugs. In vivo occupancy studies with PET have become nearly de rigueur for demonstrating target engagement by candidate drugs, and the need for such studies has motivated the development of tracers for new target molecules under investigation as sites for drug therapy. Occupancy study designs have included both simple measurement of receptor occupancy in stably-dosed patients and more comprehensive designs utilizing experimental ranges of doses to form models of the relationship between doses or drug plasma levels and target occupancy, with estimates of related parameters such as ED50 or EC50 (dose and blood plasma concentration at which 50 percent of the target is occupied). Studies where ∆BPND is used to measure changes other than target occupancy by an exogenously administered drug, especially ones that utilize pharmacological challenges to induce changes in neurochemical systems outside of the normal physiological range, likely involve underlying pharmacokinetics or biophysical processes that are more complicated than the simple competition model implies, but ∆BPND is still an informative parameter to quantify the magnitude of the challenge effect. 
Irreversible Models. The most commonly used irreversible compartment model also contains two tissues, but has no route of return from the terminal compartment to the intermediate compartment as in the reversible model; the radiotracer or radiolabeled metabolic byproduct is effectively trapped in the final state. This model is most often applied in cases where the radiotracer is a substrate for several, but not all of the steps in the metabolic pathway of an endogenous substance, with the radiolabel retained on the metabolic byproduct of each of these steps. If the process by which clearance from the last shared step is slow enough such that virtually all of the accumulated radiolabeled metabolite remains in that state for the duration of the scan, it can be treated as a trapped or irreversible state. Unlike the reversible models, irreversible models do not have a broadly agreed upon nomenclature, but here the terminology CPRE (for precursor, subsuming all reversible states in brain prior to the last, trapped state) and CM (for metabolite, the trapped state) are adapted. While there is no equilibrium state in an irreversible model, a hypothetical steady state can be envisioned in which the efflux and influx of CPRE to and from the arterial plasma are just balanced by the forward transformation of CPRE to CM and the concentration CPRE remains constant. From the 

========831========

compartment model equations, this steady state would satisfy the condition CPRE = [K1/(k2 + k3)]CP. The overall rate of trapping, equal to k3CPRE, would then equal [K1 k3/(k2 + k3)]CP. The expression K1 k3/(k2 + k3) is called Kin, the steady-state uptake rate constant of the tracer, and is the usual outcome measure estimated in irreversible models. In similar fashion to reversible models, if a reference tissue for the irreversible process exists, a modified version of Kin can be estimated without the need for collecting arterial plasma. 
Examples of Irreversible Models. The assumptions in irreversible models are more specific to the individual applications than with reversible models. A general sense for the way they work is most readily described through the examples of [18F] DOPA and 
18FDG, 
two of the most widely used metabolism tracers in brain PET. 
[18F] DOPA is a substrate for AADC, the enzyme that catalyzes L- dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) into dopamine within the dopaminergic terminals. [18F] DOPA readily passes the BBB and cell membranes, and is metabolized by AADC into 6-fluorodopamine (6-FDA), effectively 
18F- labeled dopamine, in dopaminergic terminals. 6-FDA, like endogenous dopamine, does not cross the BBB and so is “trapped” in the proximity of the terminals and the cycle of vesicular loading, release through exocytosis and reuptake into the terminal, in parallel with endogenous dopamine in the striatum, where reuptake through DATs is the dominant mode of clearance from the synapse. Kin, estimated with the irreversible trapping model, represents a marker of presynaptic dopaminergic condition. The trapping is only approximate, because 6-FDA is a substrate for MAO and for catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), and the radiolabeled metabolic by-products from 6-FDA metabolism can readily diffuse across the BBB. Several approaches have been proposed to incorporate the slow efflux from brain, sometimes called kloss, into the modeling and design of [18F] DOPA experiments, but many studies quantify Kin with the more basic irreversible model. [18F] DOPA data sets can comprise anywhere between one and several hours of dynamic imaging. Several brain regions, including cerebellum, can function as a reference tissue for [18F] DOPA imaging. 
18F-labeled 
2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (18FDG) is by far the most widely used PET radiotracer. Originally developed for quantifying brain glucose metabolism, it was observed early on that 
18FDG 
is taken up more rapidly by some types of tumor cell than by the surrounding tissue, and 18FDG 
imaging became a widely used diagnostic and staging tool in oncology and other medical fields. It is still frequently used in research for quantification of brain glucose metabolism as well. 
18FDG 
is a substrate for the same carrier protein that transports glucose into brain tissue. It is also a substrate for hexokinase, the enzyme that metabolizes glucose, and is 

========832========

phosphorylated into 
18FDG-6-PO4. 18FDG-6-PO4 
does not follow further steps of glucose metabolism. It does dephosphorylate, but at a rate that is very slow compared to the forward process, and 
18FDG-6-PO4 
is treated as a trapped state. Here, Kin represents the steady-state phosphorylation rate of 
18FDG. 
This is proportional, not identical, to the rate of these steps in brain glucose metabolism, owing to the fact that the transport and phosphorylation rates are different for the two compounds. When multiplied by a conversion factor accounting for this difference (1/LC, the “lumped constant,” because it lumps two conversion factors together), Kin/LC times the plasma glucose concentration is taken as an estimate of brain glucose metabolism. As glucose is utilized throughout the brain, there are no reference tissues. The most comprehensive approach to estimating Kin with 
18FDG 
is to obtain arterial samples and fit the PET data to the 2TC irreversible model with arterial input, or a modified version that accounts for the slow dephosphorylation, but this is rarely done in clinical research studies, where simplifications of both the blood input and the PET data acquisition are frequently employed. Simplification of blood input data can entail utilizing venous blood that has been “arterialized” by warming the site of the venous catheter to produce vasodilation and more rapid equilibration between arterial and venous 
18FDG 
concentrations, or even simpler, collecting only a small number of samples and using these to scale a standardized population input. PET data acquisition can be reduced by approximating Kin as the 
18FDG 
concentration in brain at steady state divided by the area under the curve of the arterial plasma input; the image of the average 
18FDG 
concentration over a relatively short period of time, typically 30 minutes or less of acquisition starting between 45 and 60 minutes after a bolus injection, is used in this approach. Finally, the steady-state approach can be simplified even further by estimating a parameter called the standard uptake value (SUV), in which the area under the curve of the 
18FDG 
in blood is replaced by the injected radioactivity divided by the subject’s body weight. SUV is a widely used outcome measure in clinical scans, but has come under criticism as a research tool because without any direct assessment of the concentration of 
18FDG 
in blood, the method cannot account for differences across subjects or conditions in the rate of peripheral clearance of 
18FDG, 
and therefore can only provide information about relative metabolism across the brain within a scan. 
RADIOTRACERS 
Table 1.17–2 lists PET and SPECT radiotracers that have been successfully used in human subjects in recent years. Tracers for new targets and improved tracers for established targets are constantly under development; the table is intended to convey a sense of the resources available in 2015. 

========833========

Many more tracers have been proposed but have either failed to be adapted or have not yet progressed beyond testing in vitro or in preclinical species. The pharmacokinetic properties that lead to useful reversibly binding radiotracers are delicate and somewhat different than those that might make a compound suitable for in vitro binding experiments or as a therapeutic drug. Generally, balance is required between a number of different properties in order for quantification to be reliable. For example, a prerequisite is that a tracer can be adequately supplied to brain tissues in order to provide a detectable signal. Several factors can affect this. The tracer will bind nonspecifically to plasma proteins in the blood. The protein-bound fraction (the unbound fraction is called fP; 1 – fP is the bound fraction) can be very high; for some radiotracers 1 – fP > 99 percent. In some cases this may prevent an adequate concentration of radiotracer from entering the brain for reliable image quantification. BBB penetrability is an issue that must be addressed in the in vivo setting that does not arise in cell cultures or in vitro assays utilizing brain tissue. A property related to this is lipophilicity. High lipophilicity generally improves the potential of a compound for BBB penetration, but it also leads to high nonspecific binding. If the nonspecific binding is too high relative to specific binding, the specific binding signal will be difficult to separate from background, leading effectively, to low BPND and unreliable quantification. Thus, lipophilicity must have an intermediate value (log P in the range 1.5 to 4) to balance between the need for brain penetrance and the undesirable effect of high nonspecific binding. Also related to BBB penetrability is the fact that some radiotracer candidates are substrates or weak substrates for P- glycoprotein (P-gp) or other efflux mechanisms that actively prevent brain entry; this can be hard to predict prior to in vivo testing. Another property that needs to be considered is the relationship between affinity of the tracer for its target and the target density. As BPND = fNDBMAX/KD, it can be seen that for a given target availability and fND, BPND varies directly with affinity. If BPND is too low, specific binding cannot be reliably measured relative to nonspecific binding (Fig. 1.17–11). Conversely, if target density is very high, a high affinity tracer may not reach a washout phase within a reasonable time frame and parameter estimates will not be stable—small perturbations of the data late in the scan will lead to large changes in outcome measures (Fig. 1.17–11). Targets that are distributed very heterogeneously in the brain may require multiple radiotracers, with moderate affinity tracers for high BMAX regions and high-affinity tracers for low BMAX regions. Some tracers that appear promising in development may turn out to be too far to one end or the other of this spectrum to be useful in humans: either BPND too low everywhere or wash out too slow everywhere. Another phenomenon that can limit the usefulness of a radiotracer is the discovery that in vivo, its selectivity for the primary target molecule 

========834========

compared to a secondary target is less than predicted in vitro. Generally, tracers are screened in vitro for binding affinity to many brain proteins, but there have been cases where the in vitro affinity for a primary target is several hundred-fold greater than for another protein, but in vivo the affinities are found to differ by much less and binding to the secondary target presents a confound for quantification. Finally, a tracer may appear to have high potential according to all of the above criteria and then turn out to have a radiolabeled metabolite in the blood that crosses the BBB and makes quantification difficult or impossible. 
Chemists working in radiotracer development can control some of these parameters, but much of the process is trial and error. Development might entail starting with an initial pharmacophore or a molecule known to have specificity for the target and then iterating through the sequence of devising a radiolabeling procedure, testing the result in vitro, testing in preclinical species, altering the molecule to improve properties based on test results, and repeating until a suitable candidate has strong enough potential for human testing. This process can be long and arduous, often taking years to arrive at a suitable radiotracer for a given target. Some recent work has focused on ways to streamline the process or on the development of a rational approach to predicting the quantitative potential of new tracers early in their development. 
NEUROCHEMICAL IMAGING IN PSYCHIATRIC RESEARCH 
As Table 1.17–2 demonstrates, radiotracers for imaging many different neurochemical systems have progressed as far as human imaging. Some of these are recently developed or have only been used in one or several studies, whereas dozens or even hundreds of studies of neuropsychiatric illnesses and other conditions related to brain function have been published using some of the more established tracers. Some of the most studied areas are schizophrenia and related conditions, major depression and other mood and affect disorders, substance and alcohol abuse and addiction, and more recently, Alzheimer disease and other dementias, but many more have been investigated. Some of these extensively studied areas and some well-replicated results are described here. This section is not intended to be a comprehensive review of all neuroimaging results in psychiatry, but rather, a selective sample to convey the nature of the research, some of the more well-established or informative results, and cases illustrating the capabilities as well as limitations of radiotracer imaging. 
Dopamine 
The dopaminergic system is one of the most extensively studied neurotransmission systems with both PET and SPECT imaging. Studies 

========835========

have examined receptor and transporter availability as well as transmitter synthesis, storage and release capacity in cohorts from a broad range of patient populations. Most recently, several tracers have been developed for intracellular enzymes involved in the signaling pathways of dopamine receptors such and phosphodiesterase 10A (PDE10A). Because all antipsychotic drugs block dopamine D2 receptor transmission to some degree, and because of the role of dopamine transmission in functions such as attribution of salience to environmental stimuli or fine tuning of working memory, dopaminergic dysfunction is considerably implicated in schizophrenia and there have been a particularly large number of imaging studies characterizing different aspects of the dopaminergic system in patients with schizophrenia. Another area that has produced many imaging studies of the dopaminergic system is substance dependence. Many drugs of abuse induce synaptic release of dopamine. This is especially true of drugs such as cocaine and amphetamines that act directly on dopamine terminals, but is also true for other substances such as alcohol or nicotine that act indirectly. Because of this, and because of dopamine’s roles in motivation, identification of rewarding stimuli, and reinforcement of rewarding behaviors, dopaminergic dysfunction has been implicated in drug abuse and addiction, and this has been an area of focus for imaging. 
Table 1.17–2. 
PET and SPECT Radiotracers in Published Studies with Human Subjects Target System Specific Target PET Radioligand SPECT Radioligand Dopamine D2/D3 receptor [11C]raclopride [123I]IBZM 
[18F]fallypride [123I]epidepride 
[11C]fallypride 
[11C]FLB457 
[11C]-(+)-PHNO 
[11C]NPA 
[11C]MNPA 
D1/D5 receptor [11C]NNC112 
[11C]SCH23390 
Reuptake Transporter [11C]PE2I [123I]PE2I 
[11C]altropane [99mTc]TRODAT-1 
[18F]CFT [123I]β-CIT 
[11C]CFT [123I]FP-CIT 
DA terminals [18F]DOPA 
[18F]FMT 
VMAT2 [11C]DTBZ 
[18F]AV133 
Serotonin 
SERT 
[11C]McN5652 [11C]DASB [11C]AFM 
[123I]β-CIT [123I]ADAM 

========836========

5-HT1A receptor 
5-HT2A receptor 
5-HT1B receptor 
Norepinephrine 
5-HT6 receptor NET 
Opioid 
Acetylcholine 
μ opioid receptor opioid receptor α4β2* nicotinic receptor 
Glycine 
nicotinic receptors muscarinic M2 GlyT1 
GABA Adenosine Glutamate 
GABAA receptor Adenosine 2A receptor mGluR5 
Substance P Enzymes 
NK1 receptor MAO B MAO A 
PDE4 PDE10 
Neuroinflammation 
TSPO 
Cannabinoid 
CB1 receptor 
Misfolded Proteins 
FAAH β-Amyloid 
[11C]HOMADAM [carbonyl -11C]WAY100635 [18F]MPPF 
[18F]FCWAY 
[18F]MEFWAY 
[11C]CUMI101 
[11C]MDL100907 [11C]CIMBI-36 
[18F]Altanserin [11C]P943 
[11C]AZ10419369 [11C]GSK215083 [18F]MeNER 
[11C]MRB 
[11C]carfentanil [11C]diprenorphine 2-[18F]-FA-85380 [18F]AZAN 
[11C]nicotine 
[18F]FP-TZTP 
[11C]GSK931145 [11C]RO5013853 [11C]flumazenil [18F]CPFPX 
[11C]ABP688 
[18F]FPEB 
[18F]SPA-RQ 
[11C]deprenyl 
[11C]clorgyline [11C]harmine 
[11C]rolipram 
[11C]IMA107 
[18F]MNI659 
[123I]5-I-R91150 
[123I]5–1A-85380 
[123I]iomazenil [123I]MNI420 
[11C]PK11195 [11C]PBR28 [18F]PBR06 [18F]PBR111 [18F]FEPPA [11C]OMAR [18F]MK9470 [11C]CURB [11C]PiB [11C]AZD2184 [11C]AZD4694 [18F]GE067 
[123I]PK11195 [123I]CLINDE 
[123I]AM281 

========837========

Tau 
[11C]SB13 [18F]BAY94–9172 [18F]AV45 [18F]FDDNP† [18F]T807 [18F]-THK105 [18F]-THK523 [11C]-PBB3 
FIGURE 1.17–11. Time to peak-specific binding in simulated 2TC time activity curves. These curves were all created with the same input function and the same K1, k2 and k4 values. They differ only in k3, which is proportional to BAVAIL. They illustrate the fact that the time of the peak-specific binding increases with increasing BAVAIL. In the upper left panel (BPND = 0.2), the majority of the activity is attributable to the CND curve so that it will be difficult to distinguish CT from CND and BPND will be difficult to estimate accurately; the signal to noise ratio is too low. In the lower right panel (BPND = 35), the peak-specific binding occurs so late in the scan that small perturbations of the last several data points could lead to large differences in estimated VT or BPND. The other two panels (BPND = 5, 10) illustrate cases where parameter estimation would be robust, both because CS comprises a large part of CT, and peak-specific binding and a washout phase are reached during the course of the scan. Dashed curves are CND, dotted curves are CS, and solid curves are CT. 
D1 Receptor Availability. Dopamine D1-like receptors are distributed throughout most of the brain, with high concentration in the striatum and low-to-moderate concentration in frontal cortex. D1 concentration in the cerebellum is below the detectable level with currently available tracers and cerebellum is treated as a reference tissue. Because of the involvement of 

========838========

cortical dopaminergic function in cognition and working memory, there has been great interest in assessing cortical D1 in conditions where these are affected, especially schizophrenia. There are two PET radiotracers that have been most frequently used to assess D1 receptor availability. These are [11C]NNC112 and [11C]SCH23390. Neither tracer can distinguish between D1 and D5 receptors. The signal to noise ratio, embodied in BPND values, is approximately threefold higher for [11C]NNC112 than for [11C]SCH23390. Also, the rapid peripheral metabolism of [11C]SCH23390 has made it difficult to measure arterial plasma concentration reliably, so that [11C]SCH23390 is used exclusively with reference tissue methods, whereas [11C]NNC112 can be used with both arterial input and reference tissue methods. Several studies have been performed to examine D1 availability in patients with schizophrenia. The studies utilizing [11C]NNC112 have found increased cortical D1 in antipsychotic drug-free patients and especially patients without prior history of antipsychotic drug treatment compared to demographically matched control subjects, whereas the studies utilizing [11C]SCH23390 have found decreased D1. Initially it was thought this might reflect differences in tracer properties, but subsequent studies from both sets of investigators, comparing subsamples of the original cohorts who had been administered both tracers, have yielded results in the same directions as originally reported, suggesting this may be more related to population heterogeneity than to the tracers. Over the past decade, several investigators have demonstrated that the selectivity of both [11C]NNC112 and [11C]SCH23390 for D1 compared to serotonin 5-HT2A receptors is approximately 10-fold rather than the 100-fold difference measured in vitro, and that 25 to 35 percent of cortical BPND is attributable to 5-HT2A binding for both tracers. Investigators presented some evidence that 5- HT2A binding probably did not contribute to group differences in the schizophrenia studies, but unless more D1 selective radiotracers are developed, future studies will need to account for this factor when interpreting their results. 
D2/D3 Receptor Availability. Dopamine D2-like receptors are heterogeneously distributed, with high concentration in the striatum, low concentration in thalamus, midbrain (substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, SN/VTA) and medial temporal cortical regions (amygdala, hippocampus), and very low concentration in frontal cortex. These receptors are among the most studied with imaging and many tracers have been developed. Widely used tracers are [11C]raclopride for PET and [123I]IBZM for SPECT. Both are suitable for striatal imaging but do not have high enough BPND for imaging outside the striatum. Cerebellum is frequently used as a reference tissue for each, and neither tracer distinguishes between D2 and D3 receptors. Several higher affinity tracers 

========839========

have been developed for extrastriatal imaging, including [18F]fallypride and [11C]FLB457 for PET and [123I]epidepride for SPECT. [11C]FLB457 can only be used quantitatively in cortex and limbic regions as striatal binding does not reach equilibrium within a suitable time frame for 
11C 
imaging. Also, unlike most other tracers for D2-like receptors, specific binding of [11C]FLB457 is detectable in cerebellum. [18F]fallypride, with its more long- lived radioisotope, can be used to simultaneously image the striatum and extrastriatal regions, though cortical BPND is still very low, and striatal imaging requires lengthy scanning of at least 3 to 4 hours. Specific binding in cerebellum has also been detected with [123I]epidepride, which is chemically similar to [11C]FLB457. The long half-life of 
123I 
allows simultaneous striatal and extrastriatal imaging, but again, with very long scan times in excess of 4 hours. Additionally, some investigators have detected radiolabeled metabolites of [123I]epidepride in brain. None of these high-affinity tracers can be used to distinguish between D2 and D3 receptors. [11C]-(+)-PHNO is an agonist radiotracer that is strongly D3- preferring. Estimates of its in vivo D3:D2 selectivity range from 20- to 50- fold. D3 receptors are much less widely distributed and in lower concentrations than D2 receptors, but the D3-preferrring nature of [11C]- (+)-PHNO has allowed noninvasive in vivo characterization of D3 receptors for the first time. Binding is quantifiable in the striatum, the globus pallidus, the thalamus, the SN/VTA, and hypothalamus. Dorsal striatum BPND is attributable mostly to D2 binding, SN/VTA and hypothalamus BPND are attributable mostly to D3 binding, and globus pallidus, thalamus, and ventral striatum BPND represent a mixture of both receptor subtypes. Cerebellum is used as a reference tissue. 
D2 RECEPTOR AVAILABILITY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA. Studies of striatal D2 receptor availability in schizophrenia have been mixed, with meta-analyses suggesting that striatal D2-like receptor availability may be slightly elevated if at all. Most of these studies were performed with [11C]raclopride or [123I]IBZM. One recent study also failed to detect a difference in striatal [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND between patients with schizophrenia and matched control subjects. Studies have also been published assessing extrastriatal D2 availability in schizophrenia using [18F]fallypride, [11C]FLB457 and [123I]epidepride imaging. Individual studies have reported differences between patients and controls in several brain regions such as temporal cortex, anterior cingulate or thalamus, but these have not been seen consistently across studies or even go in opposite directions, suggesting that observed changes were either state dependent or due to population heterogeneity. In summary, the imaging literature to date suggests that dopaminergic dysfunction in schizophrenia is not likely mediated through receptor expression levels, but rather, through either pre- or postsynaptic 

========840========

phenomena. 
D2 RECEPTOR AVAILABILITY IN SUBSTANCE DEPENDENCE. In substance dependence, a very different picture has emerged in which studies have consistently shown decreased striatal D2 availability in subjects who are dependent on a variety of substances including cocaine, methamphetamine, alcohol, or heroin. An exception is cannabis use in which such differences have not been detected in several studies using [11C]raclopride, but this may be related to the moderate use levels of the subjects enrolled in those studies and imaging studies focused on heavy users have yet to be reported. 
Dopamine Release, Synthesis, and Storage Capacity. Many studies have used imaging methods to indirectly assess aspects of dopamine transmission. These include studies measuring ∆BPND of a receptor- binding tracer to infer levels, or changes in levels, of synaptic dopamine following pharmacological challenges, and metabolism studies using mainly [18F]DOPA to assess presynaptic dopamine tone. In theory, any radiotracer that binds to receptors should be sensitive to changes in the synaptic concentration of the endogenous neurotransmitter, but for reasons that are not yet well understood, radiotracers for D2-like receptors have turned out to be the most sensitive. Thus, studies examining dopamine transmission have mainly used [11C]raclopride or [123I]IBZM. More recently, several studies have been published using [18F]fallypride or [11C]FLB457 to examine extrastriatal dopamine transmission, or [11C]-(+)- PHNO, which provides another perspective due to its agonist and D3- preferring properties. Two of the most widely used pharmacological compounds for increasing synaptic dopamine are dextroamphetamine (d- AMPH) and methylphenidate (MPH). d-AMPH causes dopamine to be extruded from intracellular synaptic vesicles and to be released in synapses by reversing the direction of action of the dopamine reuptake transporter (DAT). ∆BPND in the striatum between a baseline scan and a post d-AMPH scan shows decreased binding (∆BPND < 0) consistent with competition at the receptors between the radiotracer and dopamine. The d-AMPH paradigm has been carefully validated; preclinical testing has demonstrated that measured ∆BPND is strongly correlated with released dopamine levels measured by microdialysis, that the measured levels are d-AMPH dose dependent, and that the d-AMPH effect is negated (∆BPND ~ 0) when dopamine is depleted prior to administration of d-AMPH, that is, the effect requires the presence of dopamine. There is some question as to whether, in addition to competition between the radiotracer and dopamine, the d- AMPH effect is mediated by other processes such as trafficking of receptors between the cell surface and cytoplasm, because the decreased BPND is sustained for at least several hours longer than the dopamine surge 

========841========

following administration, but nonetheless ∆BPND following d-AMPH has been accepted as a reliable indicator of the capacity for dopamine synthesis, storage, and release. Microdialysis results from NHPs show increased extracellular concentration of dopamine following d-AMPH of 1,000 percent or more and suggest that in the dose range administered to human subjects dopamine release is high, but the effects on BPND are still small, with striatal ∆BPND in the range of 10 to 20 percent for [11C]raclopride, [123I]IBZM and [18F]fallypride. Recently, a small number of studies have applied the d-AMPH paradigm with [11C]-(+)-PHNO imaging and these suggest that this tracer may be more sensitive to dopamine than previous tracers, that is, ∆BPND is in the range of 20 to 30 percent; this may be related to the agonist properties of [11C]-(+)-PHNO. MPH blocks reuptake through the transporter so that released dopamine accumulates in the synapse and extracellular space. The magnitude of accumulated dopamine concentration following MPH is less than the amount released following d-AMPH, but the effect is still reliably detected with imaging and MPH challenge has also been widely used as a measure of presynaptic dopamine tone. Because radiotracers for D2-like receptors are sensitive to binding competition from endogenous dopamine, and there is a sustained, low baseline level of dopamine binding to receptors, there is some question as to the extent to which apparent baseline BPND is reduced by baseline dopamine. Depletion studies, in which preadministration of a compound that pharmacologically prevents dopamine synthesis or vesicular storage, are designed to unmask the contribution of baseline dopamine to apparent BPND. The tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitor alpha- methyl-para-tyrosine (AMPT) prevents dopamine synthesis and causes depletion of dopamine stores when administered over a period of 48 hours or more; AMPT has been used in human subjects to unmask baseline occupancy of D2 receptors by dopamine. 
DOPAMINE TRANSMISSION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA. Studies using the d-AMPH challenge have consistently shown greater dopamine release (larger magnitude of ∆BPND) in patients with schizophrenia compared to matched control subjects. These have been observed at the level of the whole striatum, using [123I]IBZM or [11C]raclopride imaging. Studies using the AMPT depletion paradigm have found elevated baseline dopamine at the level of the whole striatum using [123I]IBZM, and, more recently, specifically in the associative striatum (caudate and precommissural putamen), using [11C]raclopride imaging. These studies suggest that in humans, baseline occupancy of D2 receptors by dopamine is in the range of 10 to 20 percent. One study in which a small cohort of patients was imaged with both d-AMPH and AMPT challenges showed a high correlation between these, that is, greater AMPH-induced dopamine release was 

========842========

consistently found elevated 
tone 
in 
the striatum 
in 
associated with greater baseline dopamine binding as inferred from AMPT unmasking. Thus, imaging measures of dopamine transmission have 
presynaptic 
schizophrenia. This is also in accord with [18F] DOPA imaging in patients with schizophrenia and prodromal subjects at high risk of schizophrenia that have shown elevated Kin compared to matched controls in patients and intermediate elevation in prodromal subjects, with an association between the magnitude of [18F] DOPA Kin and the likelihood of progression to 
psychosis in the prodrome. 
In contrast to patients with 
DOPAMINE TRANSMISSION IN SUBSTANCE DEPENDENCE. 
schizophrenia, in substance-dependent subjects, reduced dopamine release relative to matched controls has been most frequently observed following either d-AMPH or MPH administration. This has been observed in cocaine, heroin, and alcohol dependent subjects. One study also used the AMPT depletion model to show that baseline dopamine levels were reduced in cocaine users. Combined with observations of reduced D2-like receptor availability, the imaging literature suggests an overall reduced function, or blunting, of the dopaminergic system in substance dependence. These studies cannot address the question of whether low dopamine function is a predisposing factor or consequence of drug use, but one recent study using an NHP model of cocaine dependence found that presynaptic vesicle availability in dopamine terminals, as measured with the VMAT2 
lowered 
administration, suggesting a direct role for cocaine itself in the observed 
radiotracer 
[11C]DTBZ, 
is 
reduction of dopamine tone in users. 
Dopaminergic Target Engagement. 
following 
chronic 
cocaine 
As far back as the late 1980s and 
[11C]raclopride have 
early 1990s, PET studies were published using ∆BPND to infer receptor occupancy by commonly used antipsychotic drugs. It was shown using [11C]raclopride, that haloperidol (Haldol) and sulpiride (Dogmatil, Dolmatil, Eglonyl, Espiride, Modal, Sulpor) administered at therapeutic doses occupied between 75 and 90 percent of D2-like receptors and, using [11C]SCH23390, that binding of both drugs to D1-like receptors was below detectable levels. The atypical antipsychotic clozapine (Clozaril) was shown to occupy ~50 percent of D2-like receptors and ~40 percent of D1-like receptors. These papers also were the first to demonstrate a direct link between EPS and the level of D2 receptor occupancy, showing a threshold for appearance of EPS at approximately 80 percent occupancy. Since that time, receptor occupancy has been characterized for many antipsychotic drugs as well as drugs from many other classes. Studies using 
repeatedly shown some widely used atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone (Risperdal) or olanzapine (Zyprexa) occupy 70 to 80 percent of striatal D2-like receptors in patients on stable 

========843========

doses and have also replicated earlier results that D2 occupancy by therapeutic levels of clozapine is lower than for other antipsychotics. Additionally, risperidone, olanzapine, and clozapine have all been shown to occupy a greater percent of serotonin 5-HT2A receptors than dopamine D2 receptors using radiotracers for 5-HT2A. Studies measuring striatal and extrastriatal occupancy of D2-like receptors by the partial agonist antipsychotic aripiprazole (Abilify) using [18F]fallypride have demonstrated very high occupancy, ~90 percent at stable doses, without EPS, consistent with the expectation that partial agonists should support higher levels of D2 receptor blockade without EPS than antagonists. 
Serotonin 
The serotonergic (5-HT) system has also been widely studied with neuroimaging. The involvement of 5-HT in major depression and other mood disorders has led to an extensive body of imaging studies measuring availability of receptors and reuptake transporters in those conditions, but serotonergic indices have been characterized across a wide spectrum of neuropsychiatric and related conditions. 
5-HT1A Receptor Availability. 5-HT1A receptors are distributed throughout the brain with highest concentration in the insula and medial temporal cortex, high concentration in cingulate, and moderate concentration in prefrontal cortex and posterior cortex (parietal and occipital cortices). The receptors are also found in the dorsal raphe nuclei (DRN) where they act as inhibitory autoreceptors. DRN concentration is low, but still of particular interest because of the role of 5-HT1A autoreceptors in regulation of serotonin transmission, as evidence from preclinical studies and other sources suggests that the mechanism of SSRIs may involve desensitization of 5-HT1A autoreceptors in DRN over the first several weeks of treatment, leading eventually to increased serotonin transmission. [carbonyl -11C]WAY100635, usually abbreviated as [11C]WAY100635, a selective 5-HT1A receptor antagonist, has been the most widely used radiotracer for this target. Cerebellum is frequently used as a reference tissue with [11C]WAY100635, but there is detectable specific binding in the cerebellar vermis, so the reference tissue must be defined to exclude that part of cerebellum. [11C]WAY100635 is difficult to produce, due to a long and complicated synthesis procedure, and quantification is also difficult due to rapid peripheral metabolism and very low signal in cerebellum, so there have been numerous attempts to developed modified versions and alternatives. Many of these use 
18F 
as the radiolabel and have run into problems with radiolabeled metabolites in brain or uptake of [18F]fluoride ion in skull bone. Most recently, a new 
11C 
radiotracer, [11C]CUMI101 has been introduced, but its properties are still being 

========844========

characterized and it remains to be seen how widely it will be adapted. Thus, despite the difficulties associated with its use, most published studies to date in patient populations have been performed with [11C]WAY100635. 
5-HT1A RECEPTOR AVAILABILITY IN DEPRESSION. There have been a large number of studies examining 5-HT1A availability with [11C]WAY100635 in major depression disorder (MDD) and related mood conditions. The majority of these have reported decreased BPND in the DRN and many other brain regions in MDD patients compared to matched controls; a few have reported no differences between groups. A small number of investigators, however, report increased binding in DRN and other regions when using the outcome measure BPF, derived as VS/fP. BPF is a form of the binding potential that uses nonprotein bound tracer in arterial plasma as the reference value rather than the nondisplaceable concentration in brain used with BPND. There has been debate as to whether these exceptional findings are due to methodological differences, differences in patient samples, or a combination of these. Studies using BPND with cerebellum as reference tissue may be biased by group differences in cerebellum binding of the tracer or by group differences in fND. Conversely, arterial plasma and fP are challenging to measure and may contribute variability to data leading to discrepant results. Some evidence suggests that [11C]WAY100635 is a weak substrate for P-gp. Possible group differences in P-gp activity have not been investigated in MDD to date, but if they exist they might bias plasma-based outcome measures more than BPND. Thus, despite the importance of understanding the role of 5-HT1A availability in MDD, there are currently controversies in the field that may only ultimately be resolvable with the development and use of more quantitatively reliable radiotracers for this target. 
Serotonin Reuptake Transporter Availability. Serotonin reuptake transporter (SERT) is heterogeneously distributed in brain with highest concentration in midbrain, high concentration in striatum, amygdala and thalamus, moderate concentration in cingulate and hippocampus, and low concentration in frontal cortex. Cerebellum is treated as a reference tissue for SERT tracers. The first radiotracer used to image SERT was [123I]β-CIT. This tracer has affinity for both SERT and the DAT and was thus not suitable for imaging SERT in striatum where DAT concentration is high. Effectively, [123I]β-CIT could only be used for SERT measurement in midbrain. Subsequently, several PET radiotracers were developed for SERT imaging. The first of these, developed in the early 1990s, was [11C]McN5652, which has a relatively low signal to noise ratio, but is suitable for imaging in midbrain and striatum. [11C]DASB was developed in the late 1990s and has BPND values that are nearly double those of 

========845========

[11C]McN5652, but still very low in prefrontal cortex. [11C]DASB has become the most widely used radiotracer for SERT imaging. More recently, higher affinity tracers such as [11C]AFM and [11C]HOMADAM have been developed that may provide reliable quantification in cortex, but studies using these have not yet been widely reported. SERT availability, measured with imaging, has been interpreted as a marker of 5-HT innervation and the integrity of the serotonergic system. 
SERT AVAILABILITY IN MDMA USERS. 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, ecstasy) releases 5-HT and increases its synaptic concentration by binding to and reversing the direction of action of SERT. MDMA has been used as a recreational drug, especially within the so-called “rave” subculture, due to its euphoria- and empathy-inducing qualities. Animal studies performed in the late 1980s indicated MDMA produced neural toxicity and reduced SERT at doses comparable to those of recreational users, raising the possibility that MDMA use could lead to reversible or even permanent neural damage. Initial studies, performed in the late 1990s, of SERT availability using [11C]McN5652 found dramatically lowered BPND in MDMA users compared to matched control subjects. Several subsequent studies using [11C]McN5652 did not replicate the dramatic result observed in the first study, but did show moderately decreased BPND, in the range of 20 to 30 percent, in current MDMA users that appeared to be reversible both in cross-sectional studies that included former users, as well as in correlations, with duration of abstinence or amount of use, in another study. Since that time, at least eight studies have been performed using [11C]DASB in current and former MDMA users. These have consistently shown moderate decreases in cortical SERT availability in recently abstinent current MDMA users. One study examining former users found no difference compared to matched controls, suggesting the cautious interpretation of reversibility of MDMA- related neurotoxicity. An interesting aspect to this set of findings is that reported [11C]DASB BPND values in prefrontal cortex range from approximately 0.05 to 0.15 in healthy controls; these are usually considered well below the limit of quantitative reliability, but nonetheless the result that there is reduced cortical SERT in recently abstinent MDMA users has been repeatedly replicated. 
Serotonin Release, Synthesis, and Storage Capacity . Attempts to indirectly measure 5-HT release through competition with radiotracers following stimulant challenges have not been as successful as they have been for dopamine. The options for experimental design are more limited, because strong 5-HT releasing agents such as fenfluramine or MDMA are not suitable for human administration and studies using human subjects have had to rely on SSRI administration to increase 5-HT levels, which 

========846========

likely leads to more modest effects than compounds that release 5-HT directly, but studies in rodents and NHPs using fenfluramine to release 5- HT have failed to consistently demonstrate sensitivity of most 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A tracers to 5-HT, despite microdialysis evidence that extracellular 5- HT levels rise dramatically in response to the pharmacological challenge. Recently, though, two radiotracers for the 5-HT1B receptor, [11C]AZ10419369 and [11C]P943, have shown more promise. Both have proven sensitive to 5-HT release by fenfluramine and to blockade of SERT by SSRIs in anesthetized NHPs, with robust ∆BPND following fenfluramine administration that was similar for both tracers when comparable doses were administered, and moderate response to an SSRI. These studies are promising, but whereas both 5-HT1B tracers have begun to be used in human subjects to measure 5-HT1B availability, to date no studies have been published measuring 5-HT transmission in humans, and so it remains to be seen if effects are detected in awake humans with the available pharmacological challenges. 
The only currently available approach for reducing 5-HT levels to unmask possible baseline binding to receptors is rapid tryptophan depletion (RTD). Tryptophan is the precursor of 5-HT. The only source of tryptophan is dietary and by having subjects ingest preparations that have high concentrations of other amino acids but not tryptophan, plasma levels decrease rapidly, leading, in turn, to reduced 5-HT in brain. Behavioral studies have shown that RTD induces symptoms of depression in remitted depression patients. Glucose metabolism as measured with PET and 18FDG, 
CBF measured with PET, and 
15O 
water and neural activity measured with fMRI all suggest a detectable effect of RTD on brain function. Neurochemical imaging with PET has been more equivocal. Studies using [11C]WAY100635 or [11C]DASB failed to detect effects at 5- HT1A receptors or SERT. Two studies using the 5-HT2A tracers [11C]MDL100907 or [18F]Setoperone detected paradoxical effects, in which tracer binding was slightly reduced, rather than increased, in several brain regions following RTD. Thus, radiotracer studies to date have failed to definitively detect baseline levels of 5-HT in brain using depletion methods; it remains to be seen if the apparent increased sensitivity of 5-HT1B tracers to the presence of 5-HT will prove useful in this context as well. 
Serotonergic Target Engagement. PET imaging has been used to establish SERT occupancy necessary for SSRI efficacy. These studies have been remarkably consistent across patient groups, drugs, and radiotracers in demonstrating that therapeutically effective SSRI doses attain 80 percent or greater occupancy of SERT. Studies have included patients with MDD, panic disorder, OCD, and other conditions and have used both [11C]McN5652 and [11C]DASB as radiotracers. Tested drugs have included 

========847========

citalopram (Celexa), fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), sertraline (Zoloft), venlafaxine (Effexor), and others. These findings provide a quantitative dimension to the understanding of SERT blockade as an antidepressive mechanism, and a benchmark for the drug development and clinical trial design. An interesting related set of studies provide an instructive example of the application of imaging studies in the drug development. The long latency to therapeutic effects of SSRIs is believed to be related to a period of reduced 5-HT release following an initial transient increase, due to inhibition of serotonergic cell firing in the DRN caused by stimulation of 5-HT1A autoreceptors. The inhibition was thought to subside over the course of several weeks due to desensitization of 5-HT1A autoreceptors. Thus, a strategy for reducing the latency would be to block 5-HT1A receptors in the DRN. But while this might reduce autoinhibition in the DRN, systemic administration of a 5-HT1A antagonist would also block postsynaptic 5-HT1A receptors in the terminal fields, possibly interfering with antidepressant activity. Pindolol (Visken) is a β-adrenergic receptor blocker that is also a weak partial agonist at 5-HT1A receptors, and in the 1990s, some preclinical and postmortem data indicated that it might bind preferentially to DRN autoreceptors, suggesting that augmentation of SSRI treatment with pindolol might decrease the latency and increase the efficacy of SSRIs. Double blind, placebo controlled clinical trials showed mixed results, with some reporting beneficial effects and others not. In the early 2000s, several PET studies were performed to measure occupancy of pre- and postsynaptic 5-HT1A receptors by pindolol using [11C]WAY100635 imaging. These studies showed that at the doses of pindolol administered as augmentation therapy in the clinical trials, probably less than 30 percent of DRN 5-HT1A receptors were occupied, calling into question whether or not the tested doses provided enough blockade of autoreceptors to be effective. In the particular case of pindolol, higher doses could not be tested due to adrenergic effects, but these studies demonstrated the key role that imaging can play in quantifying target engagement by therapeutic agents. Among the several PET studies measuring pindolol occupancy, the most comprehensive one did observe higher occupancy in DRN than in cortex. Theoretical models have been suggested, but the mechanism for this difference has never been carefully characterized. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The field of radiotracer imaging with PET and SPECT continues to grow and expand, with the number of peer-reviewed publications using these methods increasing annually. Progress in certain areas, both in the technology and the biological science, may lead to expanded utility and adaptation of imaging. Manufacture of scanners or cyclotrons that are less expensive or more portable would facilitate even wider use. Some 

========848========

manufacturers have already considered developing lines of lower cost PET instruments, for example, by utilizing BGO detector crystals, which have some less optimal properties but are also less expensive than LSO and other state of the art scintillators. Another direction being pursued is to make scanners more sensitive, therefore requiring less radioactivity, by increasing the length of the stack of detector rings. Sensitivity would be increased because the solid angle, the total fraction of a spherical surface surrounding the field of view accessible to the scanner, would be increased. The most immediate way to expand the scientific questions that can be addressed with PET or SPECT is the development of tracers for more, currently inaccessible target molecules or processes. Despite numerous attempts, progress has been slow in developing tracers for the glutamatergic and GABAergic transmitter systems, but clearly, direct observation of the major excitatory and inhibitory neurochemical systems would benefit all brain research. Finally, it is possible that eventually, neurochemical information currently obtained by PET and SPECT radiotracer imaging will be replaced by less invasive methods, for example, by the development of neurochemical probes that can be detected with MRI. But research in this area is in its early stages and for the foreseeable future, PET and SPECT neuroimaging methods remain essential translational tools for understanding the brain in health and disease, and to inform the drug development process. 
REFERENCES 
Abi-Dargham A, Gil R, Krystal J, et al. Increased striatal dopamine transmission in schizophrenia: confirmation in a second cohort. Am J Psychiatry. 1998;155:761–767. Abi-Dargham A, Mawlawi O, Lombardo I, et al. Prefrontal dopamine D1 receptors and working memory in schizophrenia. J Neurosci. 2002;22:3708–3719. 
Abi-Dargham A, Xu X, Thompson JL, et al. Increased prefrontal cortical D1 receptors in drug naive patients with schizophrenia: a PET study with [11C]NNC112. J Psychopharmacol. 2012;26:794–805. 
Bailey DL, Townsend DW, Malsey MN (eds): Positron Emission Tomography: Basic science. London: Springer-Verlag London Limited; 2005. 
Brooks RA, Dichiro G. Principles of computer-assisted tomography (CAT) in radiographic and radioisotopic imaging. Phys Med Biol. 1976;21:689–732. 
Buchert R, Thiele F, Thomasius R, et al. Ecstasy-induced reduction of the availability of the brain serotonin transporter as revealed by [11C](+)McN5652-PET and the multi-linear reference tissue model: loss of transporters or artifact of tracer kinetic modelling? J Psychopharmacol. 2007;21:628–634. 
Bushberg J, Siebert J, Leidholdt E, Boone J. The Essential Physics of Nuclear Medicine. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012 
Cherry S, Sorenson J, Phelps M. Physics in Nuclear Medicine. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2003. 

========849========

Farde L, Wiesel FA, Halldin C, Sedvall G. Central D2-dopamine receptor occupancy in schizophrenic patients treated with antipsychotic drugs. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1988;45:71–76. Farde L, Nordstrom AL, Wiesel FA, Pauli S, Halldin C, Sedvall G. Positron emission tomographic analysis of central D1-Dopamine and D2-Dopamine receptor occupancy in patients treated with classical neuroleptics and clozapine - relation to extrapyramidal side-effects. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1992;49:538–544. 
Howes OD, Kambeitz J, Kim E, et al. The nature of dopamine dysfunction in schizophrenia and what this means for treatment. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2012;69:776–786. 
Hudson HM, Larkin RS. Accelerated image-reconstruction using ordered subsets of projection data. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 1994;13:601–609. 
*Innis RB, Cunningham VJ, Delforge J, et al. Consensus nomenclature for in vivo imaging of reversibly binding radioligands. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2007;27:1533–1539. 
Kegeles L, Abi-Dargham A, Frankle WG, et al. Increased synaptic dopamine in associative regions of the striatum in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010;67:231–239. 
Kish SJ, Lerch J, Furukawa Y, et al. Decreased cerebral cortical serotonin transporter binding in ecstasy users: a positron emission tomography/[(11)C]DASB and structural brain imaging study. Brain. 2010;133:1779–1797. 
Lammertsma AA, Hume SP. Simplified reference tissue model for PET receptor studies. Neuroimage. 1996;4:153–158. 
Laruelle M. Imaging dopamine transmission in schizophrenia. A review and meta-analysis. Q J Nucl Med. 1998;42:211–221. 
Laruelle M. Imaging synaptic neurotransmission with in vivo binding competition techniques: a critical review. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2000;20:423–451. 
Laruelle M, Slifstein M, Huang Y. Relationships between radiotracer properties and image quality in molecular imaging of the brain with positron emission tomography. Mol Imaging Biol. 2003;5:363–375. 
Martinez D, Narendran R, Foltin RW, et al. Amphetamine-induced dopamine release: Markedly blunted in cocaine dependence and predictive of the choice to self-administer cocaine. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164:622–629. 
Martinez D, Slifstein M, Broft A, et al. Imaging human mesolimbic dopamine transmission with positron emission tomography. Part II: amphetamine-induced dopamine release in the functional subdivisions of the striatum. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2003;23:285–300. Okubo Y, Suhara T, Suzuki K, et al. Decreased prefrontal dopamine D1 receptors in schizophrenia revealed by PET. Nature. 1997;385:634–636. 
Parsey RV, Ogden RT, Miller JM, et al. Higher serotonin 1 A binding in a second major depression cohort: modeling and reference region considerations. Biol Psychiatry. 2010;68:170–178. 
Savitz JB., Drevets WC. Neuroreceptor imaging in depression. Neurobiol Dis. 2013;52:49–65. Shepp LA, Vardi Y. Maximum likelihood reconstruction for emission tomography. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 1982;1:113–122. 
Shrestha S, Hirvonen J, Hines CS, et al. Serotonin-1A receptors in major depression quantified using PET: controversies, confounds, and recommendations. Neuroimage. 2012;59:3243– 3251. 

========850========

Slifstein M, Laruelle M. Models and methods for derivation of in vivo neuroreceptor parameters with PET and SPECT reversible radiotracers. Nucl Med Bio. 2001;28:595–608. 
Urban NB, Girgis RR, Talbot PS, et al. Sustained recreational use of ecstasy is associated with altered pre and postsynaptic markers of serotonin transmission in neocortical areas: a PET study with [(1)(1)C]DASB and [(1)(1)C]MDL 100907. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2012;37:1465–1473. 
Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Wang GJ, et al. Decreased dopamine D2 receptors availability is associated with reduced frontal metabolism in cocaine abusers. Synapse. 1993;14:169–177. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, et al. Decreased striatal dopaminergic responsiveness in detoxified cocaine-dependent subjects. Nature. 1997;386:830–833. 
▲ 1.18 Gene Mapping Investigations of Psychiatric Disorders 
SCOTT C. FEARS, M.D., PH.D. 
INTRODUCTION: PROGRESS AND PITFALLS IN PSYCHIATRIC GENETICS The field of genetics essentially started from the rediscovery of Gregor Mendel’s basic concepts at the turn of the 20th century, and has matured into an essential cornerstone not only of the biological sciences but also of all of medicine. The discovery of the basic structure and properties of DNA in the middle of the century led to an exponential acceleration in the current understanding of all aspects of the life sciences, including deciphering the complete sequence of the human genome, and those of myriad other species. Massive databases of such sequences now provide 21st century biologists with the task of decoding the functional significance of all this information. In particular, attention has turned to determining how sequence variations contribute to the phenotypic variation between species and between individuals within a species; in humans, it is hoped that discoveries about the relationship between genotypes and phenotypes will revolutionize the understanding of why and how some individuals but not others develop common diseases. This hope is particularly strong for psychiatry, as current knowledge of the pathogenic mechanisms of psychiatric disease remains sparse. 
Since the publication of the previous edition of this chapter, the fruits of many decades of frustrating working in the field of psychiatric genetics have finally begun to be realized. For example, no confirmed genetic variants influencing risk for schizophrenia had been discovered at the time of writing the previous edition, but since then, over 100 risk variants have been identified and replicated in rigorously designed gene mapping investigations. The growing list of genes associated with psychiatric disorders promises to redefine the current understanding of the biological basis of mental disorders. The emerging catalog of gene mapping findings does not support the popular theories of the last 50 years that have focused 

========851========

on alterations of monoaminergic systems as fundamental to the development of mood and psychotic disorders. Rather, genetic findings indicate that the etiologies of psychiatric disorders are linked to a complex network of partially overlapping cellular processes including neurodevelopment, synapse functioning, ion regulation, immunity/inflammation, and intracellular signaling. Further, genetic analyses are confirming what has long been suspected; that there is substantial heterogeneity within categorically defined diagnostic groups and significant genetic overlap between different categories of disorders. In contrast to traditional genetic approaches that aimed to identify one or a few rare genetic variants with a large impact on the development of disease (i.e., Mendelian genes), much of the recent success has been gained by focusing on the identification of common genetic variants, each of which contributes only a small increase in disease risk. There are still major issues to be resolved, for example, deciphering the relative contributions of common versus rare genetic mutations; however, as a whole, the field is finally able to begin building a empirically rigorous foundation upon which many of the deep unknowns regarding the pathophysiology of mental disorders can begin to take shape. 
Genetic mapping studies aim to identify the genes implicated in heritable diseases, based on their chromosomal location. These studies are carried out by investigating affected individuals and their families through two approaches: linkage and association (Figs. 1.18–1 and 1.18–2). It is now straightforward to genetically map Mendelian traits (traits for which a specific genotype at one particular locus is both necessary and sufficient to cause the trait). Psychiatric diseases, however, do not follow simple Mendelian inheritance patterns but rather are examples of etiologically complex traits. Etiological complexity may be due to many factors, including incomplete penetrance (expression of the phenotype in only some of the individuals carrying the disease-related genotype), the presence of phenocopies (forms of the disease that are not caused by genetic factors), locus heterogeneity (different genes associated with the same disease in different families or populations), or polygenic inheritance (risk for disease increases only if susceptibility variants at multiple genes act in concert). Mapping a complex disorder involves several component steps, including definition of the phenotype to be studied, epidemiological studies to determine the evidence for genetic transmission of that phenotype, choice of an informative study population, and determination of the appropriate experimental and statistical approaches. This chapter will start with an overview of the epidemiological methods used to identify genetically influenced traits and disorders and then describe the various approaches that are used to map the specific genetic variants associated with complex traits. The final part of this chapter will review the progress to date in mapping genes for several key psychiatric disorders. 

========852========

FIGURE 1.18–1. There are two basic approaches to mapping genes: linkage (top right) and associations (bottom right). All gene-mapping approaches are based on identifying genetic mutations that are inherited identical by descent (IBD). The left side of the figure shows a schematic representation of a founder at the top center of the figure and all of his/her descendants inheriting the risk allele IBD. Linkage analysis (top right) samples multiple generations of individuals within a family and aims to identify cosegregation of genetic markers of known location with the disease trait in affected individuals. Linkage analysis is optimal for detecting genes of large effect in family members relatively close to the origination of the genetic mutation (before natural selection results in the removal of the mutation). In contrast, association analysis (bottom right) samples generations very distant from the founder and attempts to identify enrichment of specific genetic variants within affected individuals compared to controls. Genetic mutations that have survived for many generations tend to confer a relatively small increase in disease risk (which is generally expected to lower fitness), which is reflected in the small effect sizes of variants identified by association studies. 

========853========

FIGURE 1.18–2. Genetic mapping approaches can be divided into those that rely on linkage analysis and those that rely on association analysis. Linkage studies can be further categorized as either focused on investigation of pedigrees or focused on investigation of sib pairs. Association studies can be categorized as either case-control or family-based. Some of the key features as well as advantages and disadvantages of these different approaches are shown in the figure. 
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
Genetic Epidemiological Approaches 
Genetic epidemiological investigations provide quantitative evidence regarding the degree to which a given trait aggregates in families and, furthermore, can suggest to what degree such aggregation reflects a genetic contribution to the etiology of the trait. Family studies compare the aggregation of disease among the relatives of affected individuals compared to control samples. Because these studies do not differentiate between genetic and environmental contributions to such familial aggregation, they provide only indirect evidence regarding the heritability of a trait. Often these studies measure the relative risk (λ), defined as the rate of occurrence of a disease among specified categories of relatives of an affected individual divided by the rate of occurrence of the disease for the general population. A relative risk of >1 suggests a genetic etiology, and the magnitude of the measure gives an estimate of the genetic contribution to the disease. Relative risks can be calculated for sibling pairs, parent–offspring pairs, and various other types of family relationships. Likely modes of transmission can be assessed by comparing the degree of relative risk for each type of relationship. Multiple family studies have been carried out for 

========854========

many of the major psychiatric disorders, including major depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and OCD. While these studies have consistently reported familial aggregation for all of these disorders, the degree of such aggregation has varied substantially across studies, largely reflecting differences in phenotype definition and how study samples were ascertained and assessed. 
Twin studies examine the concordance rates of a particular disorder (the percentage of twin pairs where both twins have the disorder) in monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twins. For a disorder that is strictly determined by genetic factors, the concordance rate should be 100 percent in MZ twin pairs (who share 100 percent of their genetic material) and 25 or 50 percent in DZ twin pairs (who are no more closely related than any siblings), depending on whether the disease is recessive or dominant, respectively. For a disorder where genetic factors play a role in disease causation but are not the exclusive cause of disease, the concordance rates should be greater for MZ twins than those for DZ twins. The higher the degree of concordance of MZ twins, the higher the trait heritability or the evidence for a genetic contribution to disease risk. When genetic factors do not play a role, the concordance rates should not differ between the twin pairs, under the simplifying assumption that the environment for MZ twin pairs is no more similar than that for DZ twin pairs. The twin studies that have been conducted for traits such as autism, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia have consistently suggested high heritability and have therefore spurred efforts to genetically map loci for each of these conditions. Different twin studies may, however, generate varying estimates for the heritability of any given disorder. When evaluating the results of twin studies, it is therefore important to scrutinize how the phenotype was ascertained because, as with family studies, the different heritability estimates are likely due to differences in the mode of assessing and defining phenotypes. For example, early twin studies of psychiatric disorders often relied for their phenotypes on unstructured interviews by a single clinician. In contrast, modern studies generally utilize standardized assessments and review of diagnostic material by a panel of expert clinicians. Similarly, part of the apparent variation in heritability between different twin studies can be attributed to the fact that some studies employ narrow definitions of affectedness for a given phenotype, while other studies employ broader phenotype definitions (e.g., considering a twin with MDD to be phenotypically concordant with a cotwin diagnosed with bipolar disorder). Because of such differences in approach across studies, it is usually prudent to view such investigations as providing a rough estimate of the genetic contribution to trait variability. Nevertheless, even such estimates are useful in deciding which traits are likely to be mappable. 
BASIC CONCEPTS OF GENE MAPPING 

========855========

Introduction 
Once genetic epidemiological studies of particular phenotypes have suggested that these phenotypes are heritable, genetic mapping studies are conducted to identify the specific genetic variants that contribute to the risk of the disorder. The goal of gene mapping is to identify the order of genetic loci along a chromosome and determine the distance between them. Prior to the discovery of DNA as the molecular basis of genes, mapping studies typically sought to identify patterns of transmission in families between disease phenotypes and enzymatic or physiological phenotypes like the ABO blood group to establish linkage. Current mapping studies start with an extensive set of DNA polymorphisms of known location and methodically traverse through the genome to identify the location of an unknown disease locus. There are two basic approaches to mapping genes: linkage and association (Figs. 1.18–1 and 1.18–2). Linkage analysis uses information from family members to identify loci that are transmitted together across generations more often than would be expected by chance. In contrast, association designs do not make explicit use of family information and aim to identify nonrandom co-occurrence of genetic variants of know location with disease traits. Linkage analysis is ideally suited to identify rare genetic variants that have a relatively large effect on the disease trait, whereas population-based association methods are designed to identify common genetic variants that have modest effects on the disease trait. The following sections will provide an overview of the basic concepts of gene mapping starting with the phenomena of recombination and linkage upon which all mapping methods are based. 
Recombination and Linkage 
All genetic mapping methods aim to identify disease-associated variants based on their chromosomal position and the principle of genetic linkage. All cells contain two copies of each chromosome (called homologs): one inherited from the mother and one inherited from the father. During meiosis, the parental homologs cross over, or recombine, creating unique new chromosomes that are then passed on to the progeny. Genes that are physically close to one another on a chromosome are genetically linked, and those that are farther apart or are on different chromosomes are genetically unlinked. Genes that are unlinked will recombine at random (i.e., there is a 50 percent chance of recombination with each meiosis). Genetic loci that are linked will recombine less frequently than expected by random segregation, with the degree of recombination proportional to the physical distance between them. The principle of linkage underlies the use of genetic markers, segments of DNA of known chromosomal location that contain variations or polymorphisms (described in more detail below). Strategies to map disease genes are based on identifying genetic marker 

========856========

alleles that are shared—to a greater extent than expected by chance—by affected individuals. It is presumed that such sharing reflects linkage between a disease locus and a marker locus, that is, the alleles at both loci are inherited “identical by descent” (IBD), from a common ancestor, and, furthermore, that this linkage pinpoints the chromosomal site of the disease locus. 
The evidence for linkage between two loci depends on the recombination frequency between them. Recombination frequency is measured by the recombination fraction (Θ) and is equal to the genetic distance between the two loci [1 percent recombination equals 1 centimorgan (cM) in genetic distance and, on average, covers a physical distance of about 1 megabase (mB) of DNA]. A recombination fraction of 0.5 or 50 percent indicates that two loci are not linked but rather that they are segregating independently. A LOD (logarithm of the odds ratio) score is calculated to determine the likelihood that two loci are linked at any particular genetic distance. The LOD score is calculated by dividing the likelihood of acquiring the data if the loci are linked at a given recombination fraction by the likelihood of acquiring the data if the loci are unlinked (Θ = 0.5). This step gives an odds ratio, and the log (base 10) of this odds ratio is the LOD score. A LOD score can be obtained for various values of the recombination fraction, from Θ = 0 (completely linked) to Θ = 0.5 (unlinked). The value of Θ that gives the largest LOD score is considered to be the best estimate of the recombination fraction between the disease locus and the marker locus. This recombination fraction can then be converted into a genetic map distance between the two loci. 
Linkage Disequilibrium 
Linkage disequilibrium (LD) is a phenomenon that is used to evaluate the genetic distance between loci in populations rather than in families. When alleles at two loci occur together in the population more often than would be expected given the allele frequencies at the two loci, those alleles are said to be in LD. When strong LD is observed between two loci, it usually indicates that the two loci are sited in very close physical proximity to one another on a given chromosome and is useful in mapping disease susceptibility loci because one locus can be used to predict the presence of another locus. This predictability is important because current gene- mapping strategies are able to sample only a subset of the estimated 10 million common human polymorphisms. Because of the existence of LD, one can use data from a subset of genotyped polymorphisms to infer genotypes at nearby loci. Clusters of alleles that are in LD and inherited as a single unit are termed haplotypes. Thus, LD mapping “consolidates” genomic information by identifying haplotypes in populations that can then be used to infer IBD sharing among unrelated individuals. 
There are several methods to measure the extent of LD. One of the most 

========857========

commonly used measures of LD is r2, a measure of the difference between observed and expected haplotype probabilities. Unlike D′, another widely used measure of LD, r2 values do not depend on the allele frequencies of the loci being assessed. A large r2 value indicates that the observed frequency of association between two alleles is greater than that expected by chance; that is, the alleles are in LD. LD studies have traditionally been used to complement traditional pedigree analyses, for example, to hone in on a locus that has been mapped by linkage analysis. However, LD-based association analysis has become the method of choice for whole genome screens, particularly for diseases where traditional linkage studies have been unsuccessful. These studies have one great advantage over a traditional family analysis; because affected individuals are chosen from an entire population rather than from one or a few pedigrees, the number of potential subjects is limited only by the size of the population and the frequency of the disease. Maximizing the potential number of affected individuals that can be included in the analysis is extremely important for disorders where genetic heterogeneity or incomplete penetrance is likely to be factors. 
Genetic Markers 
Mapping studies, regardless of their type, depend on the availability of genetic markers. The most widely used markers are microsatellite markers (also called simple tandem repeats [STRs], or simple sequence length polymorphisms [SSLPs]) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). SSLPs are stretches of variable numbers of repeated nucleotides two to four base pairs in length. These markers are highly polymorphic, as the number of repeat units at any given STR locus varies substantially between individuals. SNPs, as the name implies, are single base pair changes at a specific nucleotide; they are the most common form of sequence variation in the genome. SNPs are widely used for genetic mapping studies because they are distributed so widely across the genome and because they can be assessed in a high-throughput, automated fashion. Other forms of genetic variation that have been investigated for use as genetic markers include small insertion or deletion polymorphisms, termed indels, that generally range between 1 and 30 base pairs and CNVs, which can refer to either deletions or duplications. Recent genome-wide surveys have revealed that CNVs are common and can range in length from several base pairs to several million base pairs. CNVs may contribute to chromosomal recombination and rearrangements, thereby playing an important role in generating genetic diversity, and also, as many of these variants are sizable, it is hypothesized that they may significantly influence the expression of genes that encompass or are adjacent to the variant. 
MAPPING STRATEGIES 

========858========

The genetic variants that contribute to disease susceptibility can be roughly categorized into those that are highly penetrant and those that are of low penetrance. High-penetrance variants by definition have a large effect on phenotype, and therefore identifying these variants usually provides fundamental insights into pathobiology. Because individuals carrying high- penetrance variants have a high probability of expressing a disease phenotype, such variants tend to be rare and to segregate in families and are generally most powerfully mapped using pedigree-based approaches (Figs. 1.18–1 and 1.18–2). In contrast, low-penetrance variants have a relatively weak effect on phenotype, and therefore identifying individual low-penetrance variants may, at least initially, provide relatively little new biological knowledge. However, because of their small effects, such variants are typically common in the population, and therefore identifying them may add to the understanding of disease risk in the population as a whole. It is not expected that these variants will segregate strongly with the disease phenotype in pedigrees, efforts to identify them focus on population samples. In the following sections, two common family-based linkage strategies (pedigree and sib-pair analyses) are described followed by an overview of population and family-based association analyses. 
Pedigree Analysis 
A pedigree analysis, which is conducted in multigenerational families, consists of scanning the genome or a portion of the genome with a series of markers in one or more affected pedigrees, calculating a LOD score at each marker position, and identifying the chromosomal regions that show a significant deviation from what would be expected under independent assortment. The primary goal of pedigree analysis is to determine if two or more genetic loci (i.e., a genetic marker of known location and the unknown disease loci) are cosegregating within a pedigree. 
Following the successful application of pedigree analysis to map Mendelian disorders such as Huntington disease, many investigators adopted this strategy for mapping psychiatric disease genes with, at best, mixed success. In the late 1980s and mid-1990s, several pedigree-based studies reported the mapping of susceptibility loci for Alzheimer disease, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. Although the linkage findings for three Alzheimer disease loci were relatively quickly replicated, the findings reported for bipolar disorder and schizophrenia were ultimately determined to have been false positives. While a number of different explanations have been proposed for the failure of pedigree-based approaches to map psychiatric loci, most investigators now recognize that these studies were generally drastically underpowered considering the apparent etiological complexity of psychiatric disorders. 
Pedigree analysis in psychiatry has increasingly turned toward an application for which it is more appropriately powered, namely, the 

========859========

mapping of quantitative trait loci (QTLs). QTLs are defined as genetic loci that contribute to the variation in continuously varying traits (as opposed to categorical traits such as disease diagnoses). QTLs are typically loci of small effect that only contribute to a portion of the observed variance of a trait in the population. It is now generally accepted that, using analytical methods developed in the late 1990s, it may be possible to use pedigree studies to map a wide range of quantitative traits that are relevant for understanding psychiatric disorders including brain and behavioral phenotypes. Several such studies are now being undertaken, typically with multiple phenotypes being assessed in each individual in the pedigree. A more detailed discussion of quantitative phenotypes is provided after the overview of population-based mapping strategies. 
Sib Pair Analysis 
Affected sib pair (ASP) analysis, first proposed in 1935, became widely used during the 1990s for the genetic mapping of complex traits, including many psychiatric disorders. Sib pair analysis examines the frequency with which sibling pairs concordant for a trait share a particular region of the genome compared with the frequency that is expected under random segregation. Sib pair analysis is based on the fact that siblings share approximately 50 percent of their genomes IBD. Therefore, if a set of unrelated sib pairs affected with a given trait shares a particular area of the genome at a frequency significantly greater than 50 percent (the proportion of sharing expected under conditions of random segregation), then that area of the genome is likely to be linked to the trait in question. In this method, siblings are genotyped, and population frequencies and parental genotypes are used to estimate the proportion of genes shared IBD at each site for each sib pair. The linkage analysis then compares those pairs concordant and discordant for each locus. 
Like pedigree studies, ASP studies have more power to locate genes of large effect than genes of small effect. This limitation can be partially addressed by a two-tiered design that incorporates additional markers or family members after an initial linkage study in affected siblings or by increased sample size. It generally requires less effort to identify and assess even large sets of affected sibs than to identify and assess all members of extended pedigrees, particularly when investigators can take advantage of data repositories that include samples and phenotype data from sib pairs ascertained from multiple sites. For example, the US NIMH maintains such repositories for sizable collections of sib pairs affected with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, autism, and Alzheimer disease. An additional benefit of the ASP design is that it allows for the incorporation of epidemiological information, permitting the simultaneous examination of environmental and gene–environment interactions. 

========860========

Association Studies 
In the past few years, there has been increasing acceptance of the notion that association studies are more powerful than linkage approaches for mapping the loci of relatively small effect that are thought to underlie much of the risk for complex disorders. While linkage studies attempt to find cosegregation of a genetic marker and a disease locus within a family or families, association studies examine whether a particular allele occurs more frequently than expected in affected individuals within a population. As noted previously in this chapter, mapping genes using association studies is based on the idea that certain alleles at markers closely surrounding a disease gene will be in LD with the gene; that is, these alleles will be carried in affected individuals more often than expected by random segregation, because they are inherited IBD. 
There are two common approaches to association studies (Fig. 1.18–2), case-control designs and family-based designs, which typically investigate trios (mother, father, and an affected offspring). In a case-control study, allele frequencies are compared between a group of unrelated affected individuals and a matched control sample. This design is generally more powerful than a family-based design, as large samples of cases and controls are easier to collect than trios and are less expensive as they require the genotyping of fewer individuals. Case-control samples may be the only practical design for traits with a late age of onset (such as Alzheimer disease) for which parents of affected individuals are typically unavailable. The main drawback of the case-control approach is the potential problem of population stratification; if the cases and controls are not carefully matched demographically, then they may display substantial differences in allele frequency that reflect population differences rather than associations to the disease. 
Family-based association studies are designed to ameliorate the problem of population stratification. In this design, the nontransmitted chromosomes (the copy of each chromosome that is not passed from parent to child) are used as control chromosomes, and differences between allele frequencies in the transmitted and nontransmitted chromosomes are examined, eliminating the problem of stratification, as the comparison group is by definition genetically similar to the case group. Although more robust to population stratification than a case-control study, family-based studies are only about two-thirds as powerful using the same number of affected individuals, as noted previously. 
Until recently, it was not practical to conduct association studies on a genome-wide basis, as relatively few SNPs were available. Therefore, association studies focused on testing one or a few markers in candidate genes chosen on the basis of their hypothesized function in relation to a given disease. Recently, however, as a result of international efforts that 

========861========

have identified millions of SNPs distributed relatively evenly across the genome and the development of technology for genotyping them relatively inexpensively, genome-wide association (GWA) studies are now a reality. Such studies hold much promise for the identification of common variants contributing to common diseases. Early GWA studies in psychiatric disorders failed to identify any risk variants; however, recent studies have made use of very large samples (in some cases up to ~40,000 cases and controls), providing further support for the hypothesis that underpowered study designs bear much of the responsibility for the disappointing results of previous psychiatric genetic investigations. 
Statistical Considerations 
Scientists in other biomedical research fields are often surprised by the apparently high level of statistical evidence that geneticists require to consider a linkage or association result to be significant. Most simply, this requirement can be thought of in terms of the very low expectation that any two loci selected from the genome are either linked or associated with one another. The likelihood that any two given loci are linked (i.e., the prior probability of linkage) is expected to be approximately 1:50, based on the genetic length of the genome. To compensate for this low prior probability of linkage and bring the posterior (or overall) probability of linkage to about 1:20, which corresponds to the commonly accepted significance level of P = .05, a conditional probability of 1,000:1 odds in favor of linkage is required, corresponding to the traditionally accepted LOD score threshold of 3. This generally provides an acceptable false-positive rate (Fig. 1.18–3), but some false-positive findings have exceeded even this threshold. 
Geneticists generally assume that the expectation that any two loci in the genome are associated with one another is even lower than that of their being in linkage, and typically a P value of less than about 10−7 is considered to indicate “genome-wide significance.” This standard essentially discounts the prior probability that some investigators assign to variants in candidate genes chosen on the basis of their hypothesized functional relevance to a given disorder or trait. GWA studies are now replicating associations with very low P values for a wide range of complex traits, while the vast majority of candidate gene associations (which usually report as significant much higher P values) remain unreplicated. It is therefore increasingly apparent that genome-wide levels of significance are appropriately applied to all initial association studies for a given trait. 

========862========

FIGURE 1.18–3.Numberoffalsepositivesexpectedinawholegenomescanforagiven threshold of logarithm of odds (LOD) score. Solid line represents the expectation for a perfect genetic map. Symbols represent the results for 100 sib pairs using genetic maps with markers spaced every .1 cM (circles), every 1 cM (squares), and every 10 cM (triangles). The dotted line indicates the 5 percent genome-wide significance level. Lander, E. and Kruglyak, L. Genetic dissection of complex traits: guidelines for interpreting linkage results, Nature Genetics. 1995;11(3):241–247. 
THE PHENOTYPE 
The generally disappointing results of psychiatric genetic mapping studies have focused increasing attention on the problem of defining and assessing phenotypes for such studies. Most psychiatric mapping studies to date have relied on categorical disease diagnoses, as exemplified by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) classification scheme. Criticisms of this approach rest on two arguments. First, diagnosis of psychiatric disease depends on subjective clinical evaluation, a fact that underscores the difficulty in ascertaining individuals who can be considered definitely affected with a given disease. Second, even when a psychiatric diagnosis can be established unambiguously, the menu-based system used for psychiatric classification provides the possibility that any two individuals affected with a given disorder may display largely nonoverlapping sets of symptoms, likely reflecting distinct etiologies. Concern that the diagnosis- based approach to phenotyping may represent one of the chief obstacles to the genetic mapping of psychiatric phenotypes has generated considerable interest in mapping heritable traits known to demonstrate continuous 

========863========

variation in the population. Continuous measures that are hypothesized to be related to psychiatric disorders include biochemical measures (e.g., serum or CSF levels of neurotransmitter metabolites or hormones), cognitive measures, personality assessments, structural or functional brain images, biophysical markers such as responses to evoked potentials, or molecular assays such as gene expression profiles. Key features of categorical and continuous phenotyping strategies are shown in Figures 1.18–4 and 1.18–5, and each is discussed in more detail below. 
Categorical Phenotypes 
The most commonly used categorical phenotypes in psychiatry are DSM diagnoses. Some studies focus on a single DSM diagnosis, while other studies include individuals with a range of different diagnoses. The latter approach is typically used for disorders that are hypothesized to represent a single disease spectrum, such as mood disorders. Using the categorical approach, it is important to be able to classify subjects as unambiguously as possible. Several strategies are used to accomplish this goal. The first strategy involves deciding on the appropriate diagnostic criteria for the study in question and deciding how these criteria will be applied to individuals in the study. One way of standardizing the procedures used to identify and assess potential study subjects is to use only experienced clinicians in the diagnostic process and to train them in the administration of the instruments and the diagnostic criteria to be employed. Additionally, a “best estimate” procedure and/or a consensus diagnosis are frequently used. The best estimate process involves making use of every piece of available information, including medical records, interviews, and videotapes, to arrive at a diagnosis. For a consensus diagnosis, two or more diagnosticians independently review the material and make a diagnosis for each individual. The diagnoses are then compared, and individuals for whom an agreement in diagnosis cannot be reached are not entered as “affected” into the study. 
A well-designed study makes use of all available information about the genetic epidemiology of the disorder to choose a sample of affected individuals to study. It is often the case that a subset of families carries the disorder in what appears to be a simple Mendelian pattern, while the inheritance pattern is less clear for other families or groups. In a disorder where there are likely to be multiple genes contributing to the phenotype, it makes sense to begin with a study sample where there may be major loci. Redefining the disease phenotype can often simplify the mapping process by identifying such groups or families. For example, in the search for a genetic defect for Alzheimer disease, the process was advanced enormously by limiting the study population to those individuals who had early age of onset (before age 65); the early onset trait segregated in an autosomal dominant fashion. Other ways of redefining the phenotype include focusing 

========864========

on factors such as ethnic background, treatment response, symptom severity, or the presence of comorbid disorders. 
FIGURE 1.18–4. Two alternate schemes for conceptualizing psychiatric phenotypes. A: Categorical Traits as conceptualized by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) represent a “menu-based” approach to psychiatric disorders. Individuals are assessed for a checklist of signs and symptoms that are then used to categorize the individual as “affected” according to a specific diagnosis. Not all symptoms are present in samples of individuals who carry a particular DSM diagnosis, and many of these symptoms occur across diagnostic boundaries, as illustrated in this Venn diagram. DSM phenotypes therefore probably represent etiologically heterogeneous categories. B: Alternatively, in the Continuous Traits model, “affectedness” can be conceptualized in terms of an expectation that an individual will demonstrate extreme values on a set of continuous measures that correlate with psychopathology and thus are hypothesized to underlie the disorder (as illustrated by examples of six different types of measures shown in the hexagon). Such measures may also be associated with particular components of categorical phenotypes, such as those depicted in the Venn diagram. The justification for using continuous measures as the phenotypes for genetic mapping studies is that they are considered etiologically simpler and more reliably assessed compared to categorical phenotypes. In addition, mapping such traits combines information from all members of the study population (affected and unaffected individuals alike), which adds considerably to power. 
Narrowing the phenotype using the approaches discussed above may increase the chances of finding a genetic defect in complex diseases, but it can also greatly reduce the power of the study by limiting the number of available affected individuals. For this reason, it has been argued that for some disorders broadening the phenotype is an appropriate strategy. The suggestion is that for some complex diseases the phenotype of interest may represent the extreme end of a spectrum and that to have enough power to map genes other phenotypes within the spectrum must also be included. For example, mapping studies of bipolar disorder might include as affected individuals with MDD as well as those individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder. 

========865========

Although the two approaches of narrowing the disease phenotype and broadening the disease phenotype may seem to be mutually exclusive, many groups studying complex disorders have incorporated both approaches into their study designs. One way to do this is to create stratified diagnostic categories, ranging from a narrow diagnostic category to a broad diagnostic category, and test for genetic linkage under each of these schemas. Some investigators argue that for complex diseases that are part of a spectrum, this strategy decreases the rate of false negatives, that is, of missing an existing linkage because of misspecification. Others argue that using several models and picking the one that gives the highest scores greatly increase the rates of false positives, that is, of identifying an area of linkage where none exists. One problem that clearly exists with the use of multiple diagnostic categories is that as more models are used (and therefore more statistical tests are performed); increasingly stringent levels of evidence are required to consider a result significant. 
While categorical phenotypes remain the mainstay of psychiatric genetic studies, the limitations of DSM nosology as the basis of phenotyping for genetic studies are becoming clear. Genetic investigations are focusing increasingly on traits that may be components of one or more DSM diagnostic categories. For example, there is growing evidence that genetic susceptibility to psychosis, broadly defined, contributes to both severe bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, and a number of investigative approaches are being employed to attempt to identify genes that underlie such susceptibility and even to explore possible etiological relationships between psychiatric and nonpsychiatric disorders. For example, bioinformatics models have been employed to investigate medical records databases and have uncovered extensive pairwise correlations among a diverse list of psychiatric disorders, neurological disorders, autoimmune disorders, and infectious diseases. Eventually, the results of such model- fitting experiments may provide a framework to design more powerful linkage and association studies that can search for alleles that contribute to susceptibility to multiple disorders. 

========866========

FIGURE 1.18–5. The endophenotype (also known as intermediate phenotype) strategy aims to map genes associated with quantitative measures acquired from multiple levels of physiology in order to characterize the biological pathways that cause psychiatric disorders. In contrast to conventional studies that map genes associated with dichotomous disease categories, the endophenotype method can be implemented across diagnostic categories to identify the differences/commonalities in biological systems that contribute to psychiatric disorders. Because intermediate phenotypes are “closer to genes” compared to diagnostic categories, they are expected to have more power in gene mapping studies. 
Continuous Phenotypes 
Because of the difficulties experienced in genetic mapping of categorical diagnoses, neurobehavioral geneticists are increasingly focused on investigating quantitative traits that are hypothesized to underlie a particular psychiatric diagnosis and that may be simpler to genetically map. 

========867========

The rationale for efforts to map such alternative phenotypes, termed endophenotypes or intermediate phenotypes, is that the genes identified through such efforts may provide clues regarding the biological pathways that are relevant to understanding a particular disorder or multiple disorders that may have overlapping etiological pathways (Fig. 1.18–5). Several features characterize useful endophenotypes. First, they should be state independent; that is, they should not fluctuate as a function of the disease course or medication treatment and should show adequate test– retest stability. Second, they should be heritable; that is, there should be evidence that genetic factors are responsible for a substantial proportion of the variability of the trait within the population. Third, the endophenotype should be correlated with the disease under investigation; that is, different values of the trait measure are observed in patients compared to unrelated control subjects. 
Measures of brain structure and function are now under investigation as endophenotypes for psychiatric disorders. For example, several features of brain morphometry (as assessed by MRI) are highly heritable (in the range of 60 to 95 percent) including total brain volume, cerebellar volume, gray and white matter density, amygdala and hippocampal volume, and regional cortical volume. Several studies show that brain structural features that are correlated in clinical samples with disorders such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder are also abnormal in relatives of affected individuals. Physiological measures of brain activity that have been employed as candidate endophenotypes for psychiatric disorders include electroencephalography (EEG) patterns. In addition to brain measures, behavioral traits relevant to psychiatric disorders are an active field of gene mapping studies including neurocognition, impulsivity, emotional regulation, and temperament (i.e., neuroticism). 
Animal Models 
In contrast to categorical phenotypes, endophenotypes can be more straightforwardly related to phenotypes that can be assessed in animal models. Studies of genetic variations that affect circadian rhythms provide a good example. Variations in circadian rhythms have long been recognized as important features of mood disorders, and quantitative assessments of activity patterns have been proposed as endophenotypes for such disorders. Numerous studies in animal models have demonstrated that genetically controlled biological clocks determine circadian activity and that variations in clock genes are associated with variations in such activity from bacteria to humans. Genetic mapping efforts in fruit flies starting in the early 1970s resulted in the identification of at least seven “clock genes,” beginning with period. Subsequent studies showed that the homologs of several of these genes play essential roles in regulating mammalian circadian rhythms. Genetic mapping studies in mice also have identified previously unknown 

========868========

circadian rhythm genes, beginning with the discovery and characterization in the early 1990s of clock. These genetic discoveries have not only explicated the cellular networks and neurophysiological circuits responsible for the control of mammalian circadian rhythms but have also generated animal models that may shed light on the pathobiology of psychiatric syndromes such as bipolar disorder. For example, mice carrying a targeted mutation in clock demonstrate abnormal activity patterns, such as hyperactivity and decreased sleep, which are apparently modified by administration of lithium. 
PROGRESS IN THE GENETIC DISSECTION OF SPECIFIC DISORDERS 
Taken as a whole, the progress in identifying susceptibility genes for psychiatric disorders has been slower compared to that observed for nonpsychiatric disorders. The final sections of this chapter will review the progress that has been made in identifying the genetic underpinnings of several specific psychiatric disorders. Alzheimer disease represents the most successful application of gene-mapping strategies to complex neurobehavioral disorders, and the section on this disease provides an example of how genetic linkage studies add to understanding the pathogenesis of a complex trait. Gene mapping studies of autism provide examples of genetic investigations of syndromes that have relatively simple inheritance patterns and demonstrate how these studies have provided starting points for investigations of more complex autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Finally, recent progress identifying risk variants for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depression is used to illustrate the exciting directions that are beginning to revolutionize the current understanding of the etiology of these complex disorders. 
ALZHEIMER DISEASE 
Alzheimer disease provides an excellent example of the power of genetics to elucidate the complex biology of a neuropsychiatric disorder. Alzheimer disease is a well-defined form of dementia characterized by progressive impairment of memory and intellectual functioning. The clinical signs and symptoms, although characteristic, are not limited to Alzheimer disease but are also found in several other types of dementia. For this reason, the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease can only be confirmed histopathologically at autopsy. The presence of senile plaques (made up of a core of β-amyloid fibrils surrounded by dystrophic neurites), tau-rich neurofibrillary tangles, and congophilic angiopathy in the brain parenchyma and associated blood vessels are pathognomonic for Alzheimer disease. 
A variable age of onset has been noted for Alzheimer disease, ranging from as early as age 35 to as late as age 95. Family history is the second greatest risk factor after age for the disease. The concordance rate for Alzheimer disease in MZ twin pairs is about 50 percent, indicating a 

========869========

moderately strong genetic contribution to disease risk. It is now evident from a wide range of genetic studies that Alzheimer disease can be divided into two broad categories: familial forms, which account for about 5 percent of Alzheimer disease cases and are characterized by early onset and autosomal dominant inheritance with high penetrance; and sporadic forms, in which the genetic contribution is hypothesized to be similar to that characterizing other common neuropsychiatric diseases. 
The search for the genetic basis of familial Alzheimer disease began with traditional linkage studies. First, an investigation of a candidate locus on chromosome 21 in humans identified mutations in the APP gene in a small number of families in which significant linkage had previously been observed to markers from this region. Transgenic mice with different APP mutations were created and have been shown to produce β-amyloid deposits and senile plaques as well as to show synapse loss, astrocytosis, and microgliosis, all part of the pathology of Alzheimer disease. Mutations in the genes that encode β-APP all lead to an increase in the extracellular concentration of longer fragments of β-amyloid (Aβ42). Most of the strains of transgenic mice with mutations in APP exhibit increased rates of behavioral changes and impairment in several memory tasks, indicating dysfunction in object-recognition memory and working memory among others. These findings represent striking evidence that mutations in the β- amyloid gene are indeed responsible for at least some of the histopathological elements of Alzheimer disease. 
Even as the above findings were being reported, it was clear that mutations in the β-amyloid gene could not completely explain the etiology and pathology of Alzheimer disease, not least because it was shown that linkage to chromosome 21 was excluded in most early onset Alzheimer disease families. Additionally, no neurofibrillary tangles are observed in most of the different β-amyloid transgenic mice. The subsequent search for the genetic underpinnings of Alzheimer disease using genome-wide linkage analysis of early onset Alzheimer disease families resulted in the identification of two additional Alzheimer disease susceptibility genes: presenilin-1 (PS-1) on chromosome 14q24.3 and presenilin-2 (PS-2) on chromosome 1q. PS-1 and PS-2 are integral transmembrane proteins with at least seven transmembrane domains. The presenilins are aspartyl proteases that carry out γ-secretase cleavage of APP to generate β-amyloid. Similar to mutations in APP, genetic variation in presenilins causes an increase in the expression of longer fragments of β-amyloid. 
These findings emphasize one of the strengths of using family-based linkage analysis. Pedigree-based studies are especially suited to identify highly penetrant disease genes that serve critical roles in important biological processes. Mutations in APP and presenilin are rare, but different mutations in these genes have occurred in different founders; to date 185 mutations have been identified in PS-1, 13 mutations for PS-2, and 

========870========

24 mutations for APP. Virtually all of these mutations are transmitted in an autosomal dominant and fully penetrant manner. The convergence of different mutations within the same genes clearly confirms the involvement of these genes in the disorder. Although the mutations in APP and presenilin are rare, research into the biology of the expressed proteins has provided key insights into the pathophysiology of dementia. Because these highly penetrant mutations elucidate important biological functions, they also provide a firm ground to design therapeutic interventions. For example, β-amyloid “vaccines” designed to induce an immunogenic response to pathogenic amyloid are now in advanced clinical trials. Additionally, γ-secretase modulators have been developed to target dysfunction of the presenilin gene products. Unlike the current psychopharmacological treatments for Alzheimer disease that nonspecifically target cholinergic and glutamatergic systems, the β-amyloid vaccines and γ-secretase modulators specifically treat the causes of Alzheimer disease by generating an immune response or altering the processing of APP and may actually prevent or reverse the deposition of senile plaques. 
Sporadic and Late Onset Alzheimer Disease 
Mutations in APP, PS-1, or PS-2 are present in a majority of familial cases of early onset Alzheimer disease but do not account for sporadic or familial late onset Alzheimer disease. For this reason, investigators turned to other approaches to search for the evidence of linkage in a large number of small families with late onset Alzheimer disease. In 1991, the results of a nonparametric linkage study using 36 markers in late onset Alzheimer disease families provided evidence for a susceptibility gene on the long arm of chromosome 19. In 1993, association studies revealed that the e4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene was strongly associated with late onset Alzheimer disease and that this association almost certainly was responsible for the previously observed linkage signal on chromosome 19. There are three known alleles of this gene—e2, e3, and e4. These three alleles are distinguished by combinations of amino acids at residues 112 and 158; e2: Cys112/Cys158, e3: Cys112/Arg158, e4: Arg112/Arg158. In most populations, the e3 allele is the most common. However, in familial late onset Alzheimer disease, the incidence of e4 is approximately 50 percent, and in sporadic late onset Alzheimer disease it is 40 percent, compared with about 16 percent in normal controls. Inheritance of a single copy of e4 increases the risk for the disease by 4-fold and inheritance of two copies of the allele increases the risk to 10-fold. Epidemiological studies suggest that between 30 and 60 percent of late onset Alzheimer disease cases have at least one apoE-e4 allele. The e4 genotype appears to be a more important risk factor for Alzheimer disease in populations of European and Asian 

========871========

origin when compared with populations of African origin. The apoE gene has a well-characterized role in the metabolism and transport of lipids and is believed to play a role in the clearance of β-amyloid from the brain. Overall, the association of apoE-e4 with Alzheimer disease remains probably the strongest association yet identified for a common human disease. 
The establishment of apoE-e4 as a susceptibility allele for late onset Alzheimer disease has led to the search for additional alleles that might interact with apoE-e4 to modify disease risk. In 2007, investigators used GWA strategies (in histologically confirmed cases and controls) to identify GAB2 (GRB-associated binding protein 2) as an additional risk allele in apoE-e4 carriers (but not in Alzheimer disease patients who were not e4 carriers). Initial studies suggest that carriers of both apoE-e4 and GAB2 risk alleles have an almost 25-fold greater risk for Alzheimer disease than individuals who do not carry either risk allele. GAB2 appears to modulate β-amyloid production through its interaction with GRB2 (growth factor receptor binding protein 2), which physically interacts with APP and the presenilins. 
Since the initial GWA studies that identified GAB2, there have been more than a dozen additional GWA studies and together have identified more than 10 confirmed Alzheimer risk genes. Unlike APP and the presenilins, these genes have small effect sizes (odds ratio < 1.2), and are relatively common in the general population. Their role in the pathophysiology is less clear, though current animal models and cellular studies have expanded the understanding of the basic biology of the risk genes. Some of the risk genes identified in GWA studies have been linked to pathways involving β-amyloid processing. For example, the ATXN1 gene product modulates γ-secretase levels and impacts cleavage of APP and murine knockout model of ATXN1 shows cognitive impairment by age 6 months. Other genes identified by GWA studies appear to influence the risk of Alzheimer disease by impacting immune and inflammation pathways including factors that regular cellular interactions required for immune reactions (e.g., CD33) and the factors involved in the inflammatory process (e.g., CR1, the receptor for the complement molecule C3b). These immune/inflammatory processes have been postulated to mediate the neurotoxic response to β-amyloid. 
Summary 
Progress in the field of Alzheimer research has achieved significant momentum, and there are now more than a dozen genes implicated in the pathogenesis of this disorder. Linkage studies of rare familial forms of Alzheimer disease led to the discovery of high-penetrance variants that have had a profound impact in the understanding of Alzheimer disease pathogenesis and on the basic understanding of a wide range of cellular 

========872========

processes within the CNS. Association studies have unequivocally identified lower-penetrance variants that together explain much of the genetic contribution to disease risk at the population level. Taken together, the risk genes converge on a few basic biological pathways: processing of β- amyloid and immunity and inflammation. These findings have provided the promise of two types of medical breakthroughs. New therapies are in development that target the molecular pathways identified through these studies. In addition, the emerging picture of genetic risk for common forms of Alzheimer disease suggests that it may soon be possible to focus prevention and early intervention strategies on individuals who are at high risk. 
AUTISM 
Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder that was originally described as “enclosure in one’s self” by Leo Kanner in 1943, and is characterized by three primary features: impaired language and communication, abnormal or impaired social interaction, and restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of behavior. Understanding of the etiology of autism has proceeded slowly, but there is now convincing evidence that alterations in specific cellular and molecular neurodevelopmental pathways are important in its etiology. There is particularly strong evidence for a genetic contribution to the risk of autism and ASDs. The sibling recurrence risk for autism and/or ASD is between 2 and 6 percent. Given a population prevalence of about 1 in 2,000 (.04 percent), this means that the siblings of autistic individuals are approximately 50 to 100 times more likely to develop autism than a person in the general population. Twin studies of autism not only show an extraordinarily high heritability (as demonstrated by MZ twin concordance of 80 to 92 percent) but also demonstrate the genetic complexity of these disorders, with the DZ twin concordance rate of 1 to 10 percent suggesting a highly multigenic mode of inheritance. 
Increasing interest is focused on the possibility that large-scale chromosomal aberrations (CNVs) contribute an important role in autism. Early studies found an increased frequency of CNVs in autistic individuals at a rate of 5 to 10 percent compared to 1 to 3 percent in controls. Subsequent studies failed to replicate the initially identified high rate of CNVs compared to controls; however, recent work has suggested that the specific location and functional consequence of CNVs are more critical than the relative number of abnormalities. Two large studies identified a heterogeneous collection of CNVs that were not randomly distributed within the genome, but rather concentrated within a subset of loci. Functional analysis of these loci showed that they are involved in synapse development, neuronal migration, and axon targeting. These functional findings converge nicely with investigations of well-characterized non– 

========873========

CNV-related abnormalities (discussed in detail below) and provide confidence that sporadic or inherited CNVs represent an important etiological factor for some cases of the disorder. Collectively, the large population studies estimated that CNVs account for 5 to 8 percent of syndromic cases of autism. 
Even prior to the demonstration of high rates of de novo mutations in autism, epidemiological studies had strongly suggested that the genetic basis of this disorder is likely complex. For example, although the risk of autism in first-degree relatives of autistic probands is high, there is a substantial falloff for second- and third-degree relatives of such probands, suggesting that multiple genetic variants must interact to increase susceptibility to this syndrome. Segregation analyses of autism also support the hypothesis that it is a heterogeneous disorder that reflects the actions of multiple genetic variants of small effect. Genetic studies of autism have included whole genome screens, candidate gene studies, chromosome rearrangement studies, mutation analyses, and comparative genomic hybridization studies. Taken together, these studies have contributed to an emerging picture of autism susceptibility that includes genes involved in three major systems: those involving synapse formation and maintenance, morphogenesis, and calcium regulation and signaling. 
Synapse Formation and Maintenance 
Perhaps the biggest breakthroughs in identifying susceptibility genes for autism have come from studies of disorders that display clinical features associated with autism or ASDs but with simpler inheritance patterns, including fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, and Rett syndrome. In general, the genetic defects associated with these disorders affect synapse formation and maintenance. Fragile X, which accounts for 3 to 4 percent of autism cases, is caused by an unstable trinucleotide repeat in the 5′ region of the FMR1 gene at Xq27.3. This repeat expands as it is transmitted to succeeding generations, resulting in abnormal methylation and inhibition of expression of FMR1. FMR1 produces an RNA-binding protein that acts as a chaperone for the transport of RNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and is involved in mRNA translation at the synapse. Abnormalities in dendritic spine density (increased over normal) and morphology (longer and thinner than normal) have been reported in individuals with fragile X as well as in mouse models of this disorder. Tuberous sclerosis, which accounts for perhaps 2 to 10 percent of autism cases (the rate of tuberous sclerosis is higher among autistic individuals with seizure disorders), results from mutations in one of two tumor suppressor genes, TSC1 on 9q34, and TSC2 on 16p13, both of which are involved in guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) inactivation. Loss of a single copy of TSC1 in mice has been shown to disrupt cytoskeletal dynamics and dendritic spine structure. 

========874========

The neuroligin (NLGN), SHANK, and neurexin gene families are additional risk loci that appear to play a role in synapse formation and may be affected by mutations observed in some individuals affected with autism. The NLGN genes, situated on the X chromosome, produce cell adhesion molecules that are located on postsynaptic glutamatergic neurons. When mutated in rodents, these genes show defective trafficking and synapse induction. In nonmutated form, their expression induces the formation of normal, presynaptic terminals in axons. In mutants, there is defective transport of vesicles to the synaptic membrane and reduced synaptic induction. Mice carrying a human mutation of NLGN3 show an interesting phenotype characterized by impaired social novelty preference and reduced vocalizations, two of the central features of the disorder in humans. The SHANK gene family encodes scaffolding proteins that are located in the postsynaptic membrane and serve as master organizers of the PSD. SHANK3 is one of three members of the SHANK gene family and is located in the minimal region of the 22q13 deletion syndrome, known as Phelan-McDermid syndrome that includes prominent autistic features. Larger studies have found that SHANK3 mutations are present in about 0.85 percent of all autistic subjects. A third family of synapse-related genes associated with autism are the neurexins. Neurexins interact with neuroligins and are critical to the formation of presynaptic boutons. Neuroexins also link calcium channels to synaptic vessels and mediate neurotransmitter release through exocytosis. Like neuroligins and SHANK3, mutations in neurexins (NRXN1) occur rarely, but have emerged multiple times in independent familial lines of individuals with autism. 
Morphogenesis 
Many individuals with syndromic forms of autism display facial dysmorphisms and/or abnormal body growth rates. About 20 percent of autistic children show macrocephaly with increased trajectories of head growth during the first few years of life, although a smaller proportion of patients show microsomia. Although the etiology of the abnormal growth patterns is not yet clear for most cases, several syndromic forms of autism have been associated with rare mutations of genes involved in embryogenesis and organogenesis. Mutations in HOXA1, a gene necessary for normal development of the brain stem, cerebellum, cranial nerves, and portions of the calvarium, have been identified in several families with heterogeneous phenotypes that include autistic features. Missense mutations have been identified in the tumor suppressor gene PTEN on chromosome 10q23. PTEN mutations have been associated with a broad cluster of syndromes including Cowden syndrome, Bannayan-Riley- Ruvalcaba syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and Lhermitte–Duclos disease. PTEN has been shown to interact in the ERK/P13K/mTOR pathway that is critical for incorporating information regarding nutrient availability and 

========875========

growth factor signals to regulate cell proliferation and body growth. PTEN mice knockout models show macrocephaly, CNS overgrowth, and excessive dendritic and axonal growth. Syndromes involving PTEN mutations have heterogeneous features, including nonpsychiatric phenotypes like cancer, highlighting that the final expression of specific genetic mutations depends on a complex interplay of genetic background (other mutations) and environmental factors. 
Another syndromic form of autism is Rett syndrome, an X-linked pervasive developmental disorder (the first with a known genetic etiology) that occurs only in girls and is associated with normal early development followed by loss of skills, particularly social engagement and purposeful hand skills by age 4. The syndrome also points to abnormalities in synapse formation and maintenance in ASD and ASD-like disorders. Rett syndrome is caused by mutations in MeCP2, which makes a methylated-DNA-binding protein that regulates gene expression and chromatin structure and is required for normal brain development. Loss of MeCP2 is associated with delayed neuronal maturation and abnormal synaptogenesis. Loss-of- function mutations in MeCP2 are lethal in males and cause severe symptoms in about 70 percent of females; however, some mutations result in relatively mild phenotypes with some intellectual disability and/or verbal deficits. The heterogeneous expression of these mutations on the syndromic phenotype again highlights the key role that genetic background plays in determining the final manifestation of symptoms. 
Calcium Regulation and Signaling 
Another class of genes that has been linked to at least some cases of autism includes ion channels, receptors, and Ca2+-regulated signaling molecules. Gain-of-function mutations in several L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels that express constitutively active channels and lead to excessive Ca2+ influx have been associated with autism. Timothy syndrome is caused by gain-of- function mutations in CACNA1C, an L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channel, and is characterized by intellectual impairment and autism. Interestingly, CACNA1C has been associated with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, providing an example of a genetic risk factor that can cross diagnostic categories. Gain-of-function mutations in CACNA1F, another L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channel, are the cause of congenital night blindness that can be accompanied by autistic features. Several other genetic mutations have been identified in other genes that are linked to calcium regulation. In one autism case, a mutation was identified in SCN2A, which expresses a sodium channel that is regulated by calmodulin. The mutation disrupts the binding affinity between calmodulin and the channel, leading to sustained channel activity during depolarization. In another case, a chromosomal translocation was identified that disrupted KCNMA1 that codes for a 

========876========

potassium channel that is activated by depolarization or intracellular Ca2+ and leads to constitutively depolarized resting membrane potential and anomalous neuronal excitability. 
The Role of Common Variants in Autism 
The genetic mutations described in the preceding sections are rare and collectively explain less than 10 percent of autism cases. The specific genetic causes for the remaining cases have not been conclusively identified. In large samples of genotyped individuals, it has been estimated that common variants explain between 40 and 60 percent of the liability for the disorder. These estimates have motivated the use of GWA methods to identify common variants of small effect. However, to date, GWA studies of autism have yet to rigorously identify and replicate any findings. This failure is almost certainly due to the relatively small sample sizes that have been investigated; the largest sample size to date is less than 2,500 individuals, which is much smaller than successful studies for other complex psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia, where sample sizes of almost 40,000 cases has been achieved (see below for more details). 
Summary 
Genetic investigation of autism has progressed considerably in the last several years. Successes in autism genetics may be attributed largely to three factors: (1) the high heritability of this disorder, (2) international collaborations that have made large samples of autism families readily available to the scientific community for a wide range of investigations, and (3) the relatively consistent findings obtained using complementary approaches, including linkage studies, investigation of known chromosomal abnormalities, comparative genomic hybridization, mutation analyses, and investigation of animal models that display phenotypes relevant to autism. Compared to other psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia, bipolar and major depression, there are now relatively elaborated models of the molecular biology and cellular pathways that are involved in the etiology of at least some of the cases. This progress is attributable to the investigation of syndromic cases of autism, which are caused by rare mutations of large effect. Unanswered at this point is whether and to what extent the majority of autism cases (nonsyndromic) share overlapping pathophysiology with syndromic cases; a question that is likely answerable by increasing sample sizes for GWA studies. 
BIPOLAR DISORDER, SCHIZOPHRENIA, AND MAJOR DEPRESSION 
Bipolar Disorder 
The search for the genetic basis of bipolar affective disorder has been 

========877========

fraught with missteps and partial answers. The history of genetic mapping attempts for bipolar disorder illustrates not only the extreme complexity of psychiatric disorders but also the evolution of genetic approaches to such diseases. Bipolar disorder is an episodic illness characterized by recurrent periods of both mania and depression. Psychotic symptoms are often a part of the clinical picture, particularly in more severely affected individuals. 
Numerous genetic epidemiological investigations conducted over several decades have strongly supported a genetic contribution to risk for bipolar disorder. As with other psychiatric disorders, however, the definition of the bipolar disorder phenotype in these studies has varied substantially, and this in turn has resulted in a wide range in estimates of its heritability. For example, many early studies into the genetic basis of mood disorders did not distinguish between unipolar and bipolar mood disorders. Furthermore, the diagnostic methodology used in such early studies differs substantially from that employed in current-day genetic studies. For example, a Danish twin study that suggested a very high heritability for bipolar disorder and thereby had a heavy influence on the design of initial genetic mapping studies of mood disorders employed only unstructured diagnostic interviews by a single clinician rather than the structured assessments used in current studies, which have suggested somewhat lower heritabilities. 
Current estimates of concordance for bipolar disorder range between 65 and 100 percent in MZ twins and between 10 and 30 percent in DZ twins, indicating that the disorder is highly heritable (between about 60 and 80 percent). Several studies have shown that bipolar disorder is substantially more heritable than unipolar major depression, which has an estimated heritability between 30 and 40 percent. Early family studies suggested that bipolar disorder segregation patterns were compatible with single gene inheritance of a locus of major effect. Although it is possible that some bipolar disorder pedigrees segregate such a locus, mounting evidence indicates that if such pedigrees exist they must be quite rare. Furthermore, the fact that genetic linkage studies have failed to uncover such a locus with unequivocal evidence in any pedigrees argues against this possibility. The observed rapid decrease in recurrence risk for bipolar disorder from MZ cotwins to first-degree relatives is also not consistent with single gene inheritance models but rather suggests models of multiple interacting genes. 
Tremendous excitement followed the first reports of linkage to bipolar disorder on chromosomes X and 11 in 1987. Investigators noted that in several families, bipolar disorder and other affective disorders appeared to be inherited in an X-linked fashion. Likewise, these disorders appeared to cosegregate in several Israeli families with color blindness and G6PD deficiency, which map to the X chromosome. Linkage studies in these pedigrees, using color blindness or G6PD deficiency as marker loci, gave 

========878========

LOD scores between 4 and 9. Early studies of chromosome 11 were similar to those for chromosome X in that they reported significant linkage after testing only a few markers in a single region, in this case in an extended Old Order Amish pedigree heavily loaded for bipolar disorder. 
Not surprisingly, these findings generated a great deal of interest. Both studies showed high LOD scores and seemed to provide clear evidence for linkage. However, replication studies in other populations failed to produce positive results for either the X chromosome or chromosome 11, and evidence for linkage essentially disappeared in both chromosomal regions in the samples in which linkage was originally reported when the pedigrees were extended to include additional affected individuals and when additional markers were typed in the putative linkage regions. The most likely explanation in each case is that the original linkage results were false- positive findings and may have reflected overoptimistic interpretation of evidence that, in retrospect, was relatively scanty. 
The early linkage studies of bipolar disorder evaluated only a few markers because they were all that were available. With the construction of genetic linkage maps of the genome in the 1990s, linkage studies of most complex traits, including bipolar disorder, began to search genome-wide. The advantage of genome-wide mapping studies is that they do not require a priori knowledge of the biological underpinnings of a particular phenotype. Complete genome screens provide an opportunity to evaluate the evidence of linkage at all points in the genome without bias. While genome-wide studies clearly had greater power to detect true linkage than studies focused on only a few markers in arbitrary locations or around a few candidate genes, these investigations have also generally had disappointing results. The challenge of achieving replicated significant linkage results for bipolar disorder and other complex traits is apparent when one reviews the many gene-mapping studies that have suggested— but not demonstrated unequivocally—bipolar disorder susceptibility loci on chromosome 18. 
The first report of linkage came from a partial genome screen that examined 11 markers on chromosome 18 and identified suggestive linkage near the centromere. Because the inheritance patterns for bipolar disorder are unknown, the results were analyzed using both recessive and dominant models. Some of the markers were positive under a recessive model in some families, some were positive under a dominant model in other families, and some markers gave positive LOD scores in a subset of families under both models. Attempts to replicate this finding in other populations have been mixed. So far at least two groups have found no evidence for linkage to the pericentromeric region of chromosome 18 in their samples, although one other group has found evidence to support linkage to this region. Other studies have found suggestive evidence for linkage on chromosome 18, including a complete genome screen in two large Costa 

========879========

Rican pedigrees that gave evidence for linkage on chromosome 18q22–23 as well as in an area on 18p. The combined evidence of these several studies, although somewhat contradictory and confusing, points to at least two different susceptibility loci on chromosome 18: one on 18p and another on 18q. 
The complexities outlined above for chromosome 18 highlight the potential difficulties encountered in gene mapping studies. Replications of significant findings in small studies often fail in samples of different families. One approach to overcome the low power of small linkage studies is to use meta-analyses to combine numerical results of several individual studies to estimate the average effect of interest. A meta-analysis combining the results of 18 genome-wide linkage investigations of bipolar disorder failed to identify any loci at a genome-wide level of significance. The most promising finding from this meta-analysis was for a location on chromosome 9p21–22. In a separate meta-analysis that combined the genotyping data from 11 scans, linkage signals were detected on chromosomes 6q21–25 and 8q24 that were interpreted by some geneticists as meeting genome-wide levels of significance. The largest meta-analysis to date included almost 1,000 families, but even for this large sample, it is still debatable whether any unequivocally linkage signals were identified. Various explanations have been put forward to interpret the lack of findings for these meta-analyses; at the top of the list is the possibility that they have been statistically underpowered. Another consideration is that multiple genes of small effect are interacting to cause the disorder, in which case these genes will be difficult to detect with linkage approaches. This problem will be especially difficult in the presence of genetic heterogeneity. Another possibility is that each family is segregating a unique set of genetic variants and linkage analysis has little power to identify risk loci in these situations. Ultimately, it may turn out that the genetic architecture of bipolar disorder includes a mix of common variants segregating in the general population and rare alleles that are specific to recent ancestors and only segregating within a relatively small set of families. Much of the recent gene mapping effort in psychiatric genetics has focused on identifying common risk loci of small effect using GWA methods. Compared to several decades of frustrating linkage studies, recent GWA investigations are appreciating considerable success (described below). However, individual common variants identified in GWA studies account for only a small proportion of disease risk (~1 to 2 percent). Therefore, family-based linkage methods have a potentially important role for the full elaboration of the genetic architecture of psychiatric disorder by identifying rare risk variants that occur on the background of common risk variants and determine which individuals develop the disorder. 
In contrast to the disappointing results from linkage analysis described above, GWA studies of bipolar have begun to yield statistically rigorous 

========880========

significant findings. In 2007, the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) conducted the first GWA study of bipolar disorder in 2,000 cases and 3,000 controls genotyped at ~5,00,000 SNPs, but did not identify any genome-wide significant risk variants. The negative finding was notable given that six other common disorders were included in the WTCCC, all of which generated some significant findings. In 2008, a similarly sized investigation was implemented in samples from the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder and University College of London (STEP and UCL), and also failed to identify any genome-wide significant risk loci. The WTCCC, STEP, and UCL then combined their data, to obtain a sample size of 4,387 cases and 6,209 controls, and finally reported the first genome-wide significant association for the disorder for a SNP residing in the ANK3 (ankyrin G) gene. The ANK3 finding has subsequently been replicated multiple times in additional studies, which have also extended the list of risk loci such that by the end of 2013 about a dozen loci had been established as confirmed risk factors for bipolar disorder. As expected for population-based GWA findings, the effect sizes of the risk alleles are low (odds ratios less than 1.2), indicating that individually these common variants only contribute to a small increase in disease risk. Although the growing list of bona fide variants is not yet large enough to make definitive statements regarding the underlying etiological mechanisms involved in the disorder, functional patterns are beginning to emerge. Additionally, innovative variations in the GWA method, commonly termed pathway analysis, have been developed to assess the significance of gene clusters with similar biological function instead of individual genetic variants. Pathway analysis leverages the growing body of evidence in gene ontology databases to group genes into specific biological pathways and thereby improves statistical power by reducing the overall number of tests. In combination with traditional GWA approaches, such approaches have provided evidence for the involvement of a range of cellular processes in bipolar disorder including ion channelopathies, endocrine regulation, and posttranscriptional modification. Current effort for gene mapping in bipolar disorder is focused on amassing larger samples sizes. As will be described below for similar studies in schizophrenia, greater sample sizes have yielded a greater number of significant findings. The current understanding of the genetic architecture of bipolar disorder, which was murky just 5 years ago, has started to come into focus, and in combination with family-based studies and intermediate phenotype approaches, it promises to translate into clear mechanistic disease models. 
Schizophrenia 
Perhaps more than any other psychiatric disorders, genetic studies of schizophrenia have appreciated the greatest acceleration of new findings in the past several years. The success has come through the establishment of 

========881========

several large consortia that have amassed extensive samples with sufficient power to detect risk variants of small effect. Prior to successful gene mapping, family studies had clearly established that schizophrenia was strongly influenced by genetic factors with heritability estimates between 60 and 80 percent. Despite the high heritability, no meaningful genome- wide population findings emerged until 2009, when the International Schizophrenia Consortium, Molecular Genetics of Schizophrenia, and the Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium combined samples and identified a SNP in the MHC on chromosome 6p22 as a risk locus for the disorder. The mapping of a schizophrenia risk locus to the MHC region was an exciting discovery, although the full significance of the finding is difficult to interpret. It has long been known that exposure to maternal infection is a risk factor for schizophrenia. Therefore, specific MHC configurations may lead to anomalous immune responses that impact brain development and/or processes that predispose to the disorder. Additionally, neurons express MHC molecules where they are involved in several aspects of brain development including synaptogenesis, neurite outgrowth, and long-term plasticity. Therefore, genetic variations in the MHC may directly impact brain development outside immunomodulatory mechanisms. 
Shortly after the discovery of the MHC as a risk locus, GWA studies identified more than a dozen additional risk loci, and as sample sizes increased, the number of novel and replicated risk loci accumulated. In 2014, the Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, which by then had reached a sample size of 37,000 cases and 113,000 controls, identified 108 distinct loci contributing to risk for schizophrenia. It is important to note that the identification of a genetic association at a specific SNP does not imply that the genotyped SNP is the causal allele. In fact, it is unlikely that the genotyped SNP on most current genotyping platforms has functional significance. The genotyped SNPs are more likely in LD in the immediate vicinity (~100 kb) of the causal variant. Additionally, given the extensive sequence variation even within relatively small regions, establishing a specific variant or set of variants as causal factors in the development of a complex disorder is not trivial. Complicating the definitive identification of variants is the expectation that many of the risk loci identified by GWA studies will harbor causal variants that impact more subtle aspects of gene functioning compared to Mendelian genes of large effect. While Mendelian mutations often lead to major disruptions in the coding sequencing of genes, common risk variants of small effect have been hypothesized to impact gene functioning at the level of expression or regulation. In contrast to mutations that impact protein-coding regions, it is more difficult to identify mutations that lie outside the intron/exon structure of genes that may be affecting regulatory regions that control expression or chromatin structure. Ongoing initiatives 

========882========

like the ENCODE project aim to characterize biochemically active regions of the genome including regulatory protein binding sites and open chromatin regions, thereby providing a valuable resource for guiding the interpretation of mutations in noncoding regions. 
Although the elaboration of the specific biological pathways involved in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia will require definitive identification of causal mutations and their impact on specific genes, the recent accumulation of risk loci provides suggestive directions. The risk loci do not appear to be randomly distributed among genes involved in all cellular processes, but rather appear to be enriched near genes involved in a smaller subset of processes important for brain functioning including neurodevelopment (FXR1 on 3q26.33, SATB2 on 2q33.1, PODXL on 7q32- q33, BCL11B on 14q32.2, TLE1 on 9q21.32, TLE3 on 15q22, and BRINP2 on 1q24), glutamatergic neurotransmission (GRIN2 A on 16p13.2, GRIA1 on 5q33.2, SRR on 17p13.3, CLCN3 on 4q33, and GRM3 on 7q21.12), neuronal calcium signaling (CACNA1C on 12p13.3, CACNB2 on 10p12, CAMKK2 on 12q24.2, NRGN on 11q24, ATP2A2 on 12q24.11, CACNA1I on 22q13.1, and RIMS1 on 6q12–13), and synaptic function and plasticity (KCTD13 on 16p11.2, NLGN4X on Xp21.33–32, IGSF9B on 11q25, CNTN4 on 3p26.3, MEF2C on 5q14.3, PTN on 7q33, CNKSR2 on Xp22.12, PAK6 on 15q14, and SNAP91 on 6q14.2). 
Although GWA studies have appreciated substantial success over the past several years, it has become clear that common variants segregating in the general population are not able to account for all of the estimated genetic contribution to psychiatric disorders; this fact has been labeled as the “missing heritability” problem. For example, based on twin and family studies, the heritability for schizophrenia is around 70 percent, but the total amount of variance explained by common genetic polymorphisms is estimated to be about 30 percent, such that there is a “gap” of unexplained heritability. Various explanations have been put forward to account for the missing heritability problem. One factor that is likely to explain at least some of the missing heritability is the possibility that rare genes of medium-to-large effect that are not detectable with GWA methods are present in affected individuals. Prior to the recent GWA results outlined above, a number of family-based linkage studies had started making progress in the identification of loci segregating within families genetically loaded for schizophrenia. Chromosome 6p24–22 was among the first regions to be implicated by a complete genome screen for schizophrenia, in this case from a study of Irish families heavily loaded for schizophrenia. The linkage results were strongest under a broad diagnostic definition that included schizophrenia spectrum disorders, such as schizotypal personality disorder. Six additional linkage studies have shown positive results over approximately the same region, but at least three studies have found no linkage to the region. Fine-scale mapping of this region using association 

========883========

analysis in the original Irish kindreds led to the proposal of Dysbindin (DTNB1) as a candidate gene for schizophrenia. Additional association studies of Dysbindin have been equivocal. Although multiple association studies in a variety of populations have shown positive results, interpretation of the results has been difficult. Different association studies have not used the same SNP marker sets. Meta-analysis of five “positive” association studies using a high-resolution haplotype map designed to compare the five studies showed significant inconsistencies with regard to the identified disease-associated Dysbindin allele. Although it is possible that several different variants in the same gene could each contribute to disease susceptibility in different families or populations, this possibility does not explain the inconsistencies between the several Dysbindin association studies. 
Separate linkage studies subsequently pointed to a region on chromosome 1 containing the candidate genes DISC1 and DISC2 (disrupted in schizophrenia 1 and 2) located on chromosome 1q21–22 and 1q32–42. These genes were initially identified in a large Scottish pedigree in the early 1990s. A balanced translocation between chromosomes 1 and 11 was segregated in this pedigree and was possibly associated with serious mental illness. DISC1 and 2 were identified in the original Scottish family because of their location near the chromosomal translocation breakpoint. As with Dysbindin, follow-up studies of DISC1 and 2 have been equivocal. 
Genome screens, including a screen focused on extended Icelandic kindreds, have identified a schizophrenia candidate region on chromosome 8p21–22. Fine mapping of the region narrowed the search and eventually led to the proposal of Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) as a schizophrenia candidate gene. Association studies again provided equivocal and difficult-to- interpret results. Meta-analysis of 14 separate studies using the SNP marker that demonstrated an association in the original study showed significant heterogeneity between the follow-up studies. It also showed that there is no consistent association between the specific risk allele “tagged” by the marker SNP and schizophrenia in different populations. However, after taking account of the statistical power of each association study, the meta-analysis showed a positive association between NRG1 at the level of the gene (as opposed to the SNP or haplotype level). 
Despite the equivocal genetic studies, significant resources have been channeled into molecular and neurophysiological investigations of the functional products of Dysbindin, DISC1, and Neuregulin. Mutant mice for each of the three genes are now available and have been used to demonstrate interesting biological findings. For example, Dysbindin is expressed in the hippocampus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The dysbindin protein binds to β-dystrobrevin and has been implicated in synaptic structure and signaling. DISC1 has been shown to influence neurite formation in cellular studies, and mutant mice for DISC1 show 

========884========

impairments in a wide variety of tests including learning, memory, and sociability. Neuregulin belongs to a family of growth factors that mediate numerous functions including synapse formation, neuronal migration, and neurotransmission. Targeted disruption of erbB4, the postsynaptic target of neuregulin, leads to synaptic glutamatergic hypofunction. Despite the interesting biology uncovered, it remains unclear whether and to what extent any of these genes contribute to the etiology of schizophrenia in humans, and many geneticists have been cautious in their endorsement of the legitimacy of the mutant mice generated from the current list of candidate genes as models of psychiatric disorders. 
Major Depression 
Major depression is the most common psychiatric disorder and is one of the leading causes of morbidity worldwide. Lifetime prevalence varies across countries but generally ranges between 8 and 12 percent. Evidence for genetic contribution to major depression comes from family studies that show an increased risk of the disorder in first-degree relatives of probands that is 2 to 3 times greater than the general population. The heritability of major depression is generally lower than other mood and psychotic disorders and is estimated to be between 30 and 40 percent. Large population studies have consistently shown that there is a higher prevalence of the disorder in women and twin studies have shown that the disorder is in fact more genetically influenced in women with an estimated heritability of ~40 percent compared to ~30 percent for men. These same studies have estimated that although a substantial proportion of genetic causes of major depression are shared between men and women, a significant proportion of genetic factors are sex specific. 
In contrast to the recent success of investigations in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder populations, GWA studies of major depression have not yet identified any replicated findings. A major factor in this failure is that fact the sample sizes for gene mapping studies of major depression have not attained the numbers compared to schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, with the largest studies to date having about 10,000 patients. The lack of statistically significant findings with sample sizes of this magnitude is informative; on modern genotyping array, studies with as sample size of 10,000 cases have ~85 percent power to detect a variants with odds ratio of >1.2; the absence of findings to date provides support for the growing consensus that common genetic variants influencing major depression individual contribute only a small increase in risk (odds ratio <1.2). Additionally, the lack of significant findings in genome-wide mapping studies of major depression provides a context in which to interpret the vast and confusing literature of candidate gene association studies of major depression. During the past two decades, over 1,000 studies focusing on over 200 specific genes have tested specific genetic variants for association 

========885========

with major depression and have produced a complex mix of conflicting results. The recent genome-wide interrogations described have adequate power to identify significant associations reported in candidate gene studies, but have consistently failed to do so indicating that the vast majority of “significant” candidate gene findings reported to date are false positives. 
GENETIC OVERLAP AMONG PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS 
The preceding sections have emphasized that categorically defined psychiatric disorders display substantial genetic heterogeneity, indicating that the symptom clusters that specify diagnostic categories can emerge from mutations in different sets of genes. The converse is also true; mutations in specific genes can cross diagnostic boundaries. Early family studies showed that relatives of an individual diagnosed with a specific disorder (i.e., schizophrenia) are at higher risk to develop not only schizophrenia but also major depression or bipolar disorder. Gene mapping studies have confirmed that genetic risk loci are shared by different disorders. For example, mutations in the calcium channel gene, CACNA1C, have been linked to autism, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. A recent study investigated the overlap of genome-wide common variants in a large sample (~30,000 cases and ~30,000 controls) that included patients from five categorically defined psychiatric disorders: autism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), bipolar disorder, major depression, and schizophrenia. The investigation used the dense SNP genotype information to estimate the extent to which genetic risk factors were shared between the five disorders and found a remarkable degree of overlap between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder; about 68 percent of the polygenic risk attributable to common variants was shared between these two disorders. Major depression also showed a substantial overlap with other disorders, where about 45 percent of the genetic risk attributable to common variants was shared with both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, and about 30 percent was shared with ADHD. Schizophrenia showed a low (~15 percent) but significant overlap with ASDs. Autism did not show significant genetic overlap with bipolar disorder, major depression, or ADHD. Similarly, aside from the genetic overlap with major depression, ADHD did not show significant overlap with any of the other disorders. These findings seem to parallel clinical scenarios, where, for example, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder can sometimes be difficult to disentangle, but bipolar disorder and autism are usually easy to distinguish. The findings also provide hints into the emerging pattern of cellular pathways underlying psychiatric disorders; alterations in some molecular pathways (e.g., calcium signaling) can perturb neural systems nonspecifically such that the final psychiatric presentation is determined by other genetic and/or environmental factors. This scenario may be particularly true for schizophrenia, major depression, 

========886========

and bipolar disorder, which share a substantial proportion of common genetic risk factors. In contrast, disorders like attention deficit- hyperactivity do not share as many common genetic risk factors with other disorders and may emerge through alterations of cellular pathways distinct from those leading to the psychotic and mood spectrum disorders. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The field of psychiatric genetics is in a state of transition. New technologies have made the genetic exploration of complex behaviors a real possibility. While 25 years ago human gene-mapping studies involved the use of a few markers in a small number of individuals, it is now routine to genotype millions of markers in samples of tens of thousands of individuals. The development of exciting new technologies for phenotyping the human nervous system—such as high-resolution neuroimaging—and the implementation of many such assays in genetic mapping studies have created extraordinary opportunities for the large-scale association of phenotypes and genotypes in psychiatric research. While the analysis of such vast and complex datasets remains a substantial challenge, the development of methodologies for this purpose is now a central focus of research in statistical genetics and bioinformatics. 
As the field of psychiatric genetics progresses, several major questions that have emerged may soon be answered, at least partially, through the analysis of large-scale datasets. One major question is whether genetic risk for psychiatric disorders derives mainly from a few rare variants of large effect or many common variants of small effect (or some combination of rare and common variants). While well-powered GWA studies should identify common variants, they have very little power to identify rare variants. The failure thus far of linkage studies to identify rare causative variants for psychiatric disorders does not preclude the possibility that rare variants of somewhat lesser effect could play an important role in susceptibility to these diseases. Whole genome sequencing of large samples is now feasible and is being implemented with the goal of identifying rare variants segregating in families with heavy genetic loading for psychiatric disorders. 
The second question concerns the degree to which psychopathology will be dividable into discrete disorders, as in the current DSM nosology, or if the heterogeneity and overlap among syndromes is so great as to require a thorough overhaul of the current classification systems. Estimates from population-based investigations of common genetic variation show that the mood and psychotic disorders share a substantial overlap of genetic risk factors, whereas disorders like autism and attention deficit-hyperactivity may be more genetically distinct from other psychiatric disorders. To elaborate this issue more completely, it will be necessary to begin examining how genetic risk factors interact with other risk genes and the 

========887========

environment to predict the symptomatology in specific individuals. Additionally, the increasing focus of the field on genetic investigation of brain, behavioral, and other endophenotypes for major psychiatric disorders may be a step in the direction of such a revolution. 
The final question concerns the impact of anticipated psychiatric genetic discoveries on health outcomes—in terms of either prevention or improved treatments. For Alzheimer disease, concrete advances have been made and answers to this question may be obtained soon. For the other disorders discussed in this chapter, rapid advances have been made in the last several years, but the emerging picture is still fluid, and it may still be several years before enough is understood to frame this question in answerable terms. 
REFERENCES 
Balding DJ. A tutorial on statistical methods for population association studies. Nature reviews. Genetics. 2006;7(10):781–791. 
Bienvenu OJ, Davydow DS, Kendler KS. Psychiatric ‘diseases’ versus behavioral disorders and degree of genetic influence. Psychol Med. 2011;41(1):33–40. 
Cardno AG, Rijsdijk FV, West RM, et al. A twin study of schizoaffective-mania, schizoaffective- depression, and other psychotic syndromes. Am J Med Gen B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012;159B(2):172–182. 
Chanock SJ, Manolio T, Boehnke M, et al. Replicating genotype-phenotype associations. Nature. 2007;447(7145):655–660. 
*Civelek M, Lusis AJ. Systems genetics approaches to understand complex traits; Nature reviews. Genetics. 2014;15(1):34–48. 
Craddock N, Sklar P. Genetics of bipolar disorder. Lancet. 2013;381(9878):1654–1662. *Flint J, Kendler KS. The genetics of major depression. Neuron. 2014;81(3):484–503. 
Flint J, Munafò M. Schizophrenia: genesis of a complex disease. Nature. 2014;511(7510):412– 413. 
Glahn DC, Knowles EE, McKay DR, et al. Arguments for the sake of endophenotypes: examining common misconceptions about the use of endophenotypes in psychiatric genetics. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014;165B(2):122–130. 
Kellis M, Wold B, Snyder MP, et al. Defining functional DNA elements in the human genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111(17):6131–6138. 
*Lee SH, Ripke S, Neale BM, et al. Genetic relationship between five psychiatric disorders estimated from genome-wide SNPs. Nat Genet. 2013;45(9):984–994. 
Merikangas AK, Segurado R, Heron EA, et al. The phenotypic manifestations of rare genic CNVs in autism spectrum disorder. Mol Psychiatry. 2015;20(11):1366–1372. 
Munafò MR, Thiselton DL, Clark TG, Flint J. Association of the NRG1 gene and schizophrenia: a meta-analysis. Mol Psychiatry. 2006;11(6):539–546. 
Mutsuddi M, Morris DW, Waggoner SG, Daly MJ, Scolnick EM, Sklar P. Analysis of high- resolution HapMap of DTNBP1 (Dysbindin) suggests no consistency between reported common variant associations and schizophrenia. Am J Hum Genet. 2006;79(5):903–909. 

========888========

Ott J, Wang J, Leal SM. Genetic linkage analysis in the age of whole-genome sequencing. Nat Reviews Genet. 2015;16:275–284. 
O’Tuathaigh CM, Babovic D, O’Meara G, Clifford JJ, Croke DT, Waddington JL. Susceptibility genes for schizophrenia: characterisation of mutant mouse models at the level of phenotypic behaviour. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2007;31(1):60–78. 
Persico AM, Napolioni V. Autism genetics. Behav Brain Res. 2013;251:95–112. 
Pinto D, Delaby E, Merico D, et al. Convergence of genes and cellular pathways dysregulated in autism spectrum disorders. Am J Hum Genet. 2014;94(5):677–694. 
Reiman EM, Webster JA, Myers AJ, et al. GAB2 alleles modify Alzheimer’s risk in APOE epsilon4 carriers. Neuron. 2007;54(5):713–720. 
Roybal K, Theobold D, Graham A, et al. Mania-like behavior induced by disruption of CLOCK. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104(15):6406–6411. 
Rzhetsky A, Wajngurt D, Park N, Zheng T. Probing genetic overlap among complex human phenotypes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104(28):11694–11699. 
*Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2014. Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature. 2014;511(7510):421–427. Shih RA, Belmonte PL, Zandi PP. A review of the evidence from family, twin and adoption studies for a genetic contribution to adult psychiatric disorders. Int Rev Psychiatry. (Abingdon, England). 2004;16(4):260–283. 
Sklar P, Pato MT, Kirby A, et al. Genome-wide scan in Portuguese Island families identifies 5q31–5q35 as a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia and psychosis. Mol Psychiatry. 2004;9(2):213–218. 
Stanewsky R. Genetic analysis of the circadian system in Drosophila melanogaster and mammals. J Neurobiol. 2003;54(1):111–147. 
*Sullivan PF, Daly MJ, O’Donovan M. Genetic architectures of psychiatric disorders: the emerging picture and its implications. Nat Rev Genet. 2012;13(8):537–551. 
Tanzi RE. The genetics of Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012;2(10):1–10. Thomas D. Statistical Methods in Genetic Epidemiology. New York: Oxford University Press; 2004. 
Visscher PM, Hill WG, Wray NR. Heritability in the genomics era—concepts and misconceptions. Nat Rev Genet. 2008;9(4):255–266. 
Witte JS, Visscher PM, Wray NR. The contribution of genetic variants to disease depends on the ruler. Nat Rev Genet. 2014;15(11):765–776. 
▲ 1.19 Animal Models in Psychiatry 
SIETSE JONKMAN, PH.D., AND PAUL J. KENNY, PH.D. 
THE USE OF ANIMAL MODELS IN PSYCHIATRIC RESEARCH 
Animal research allows experimenters to manipulate and measure behavioral and biological processes that are relevant to psychiatry. Animal research in psychiatry falls into two broad categories. First, basic research 

========889========

aims to improve the current understanding of psychological and neural processes in their species-specific context using established and novel technical approaches. Second, in applied research, animal experiments are used to model human psychiatry, either to help identify novel targets for therapeutic drug development or to provide a preclinical test of the effectiveness of a compound on a behavior considered relevant to a psychiatric disorder. The usefulness of the latter type of research depends entirely on the degree to which findings can be translated between species. 
There are clearly substantial differences between humans and NHPs and rodents, which are the species most often used in animal research. Abstract thought in humans allows for self-regulation, exemplified by the fact that humans, unlike any other animal, will diet and willingly forego the opportunity to consume tasty food in order to lose weight. Conversely, self- reflection can lead to rumination, which may play a role in human susceptibility to depression. Language allows humans to engage in uniquely complex communication, and insights gained during therapy may be instrumental in coping with psychiatric disorders. Biological differences probably underlie these differences, including a more developed cortex and prefrontal cortex compared to NHPs and particularly rodents. More broadly, although the vast majority of human genes have homologous versions in NHPs and rodents, there are substantial differences at the level of gene regulation that likely explain differences in organismal complexity. 
Table 1.19–1. 
Implication of Class of Symptoms in Major Psychiatric Disorders 
Schizop ​ Bipolar Depr ​ Eating Impulse- Domain Autism ADHD hrenia Disorder ession Anxiety PTSD OCD Disorder Control Negative ++ + ++ +++ +++ +++ +++ ++ ++ + 
valence 
Positive ++ +++ ++ +++ + + ++ +++ +++ +++ 
valence 
Cognitive +++ +++ +++ + + + + +++ + +++ Social +++ + ++ ++ ++ ++ + + + ++ Sleep and ++ ++ + +++ ++ ++ +++ + ++ + 
arousal 
+++, strongly impacted; ++, moderately implicated; +, slightly implicated. 
These differences notwithstanding, there are many similarities between humans and experimental animals in both functional and biological terms. Thus, basic psychological processes such as stress, panic, anxiety, motivation, attention, and reward are present in rodents and NHPs, albeit in species-specific expressions. In addition, subcortical structures are quite well conserved, with a common brain design and substantial homologies for most neural structures. 

========890========

Based on these considerations, and on the limited success in using animal models to develop new therapeutics for psychiatric disorders, it has been suggested that animals should be used to model particular symptoms, instead of entire human psychiatric disorders. In particular, productive animal research in psychiatry should focus on well-defined phenotypes that have a known biological basis and that can be measured to facilitate experimentation, and preferentially focus on brain substrates that have reasonable homologies between humans and the animal model of choice. In addition, when genetic models are used in animals, it is useful to focus on highly penetrant genetic variants to ensure relevance to human disease. In a general sense, the usefulness of animal models in modeling aspects of human psychiatric disorders can be assessed by three criteria. 
► Face validity refers to the extent to which a behavior that is studied in 
animals resembles the behavior in humans it is intended to model. ► Predictive validity refers to the extent to which drug effects in animal 
models predict clinical effectiveness in psychiatric patients, and an ideal 
model would have low false positive and false negative rates. 
► Construct validity refers to the extent to which an animal model 
reproduces the etiology of the human psychiatric disorder. 
Following recent guidelines from the NIMH, this chapter is organized by a description of available animal models in five broad classes of symptoms, which may be observed across psychiatric disorders (see Table 1.19-1). 

========891========

NEGATIVE VALENCE 
Defensive Behaviors 
Ethological studies of defensive behavior in rodents have shown that threatening situations evoke defensive behaviors that depend on the proximity of the threat. When a threat is very near and acute, panic responses consisting of flight or defensive attack are elicited, while fear responses consisting of concealment and freezing occur when a threat is present but more distal. Finally, potential threats elicit lower intensity anxiety-like behavior, with risk assessment and reduction in exploratory behaviors for extended periods of time. In general, animal models of defensive behavior are focused on acute normal defensive responses, while only few models involve chronic stress manipulations. 
Panic-Like Behavior. Panic responses can be studied in rats and mice in its ethological context in defensive tests that use a predator (humans or rats, respectively) closing in on subjects in a circular runway. In this test, called the defense test battery, the predator approaches the subject in a long oval runway, and flight responses can be quantified. If the runway is blocked at one point, imminent approach of the rat or mice elicits defensive threat and attack responses. In addition to good face validity, pharmacologic agents that are clinically effective at reducing panic attacks have been shown to reduce flight in this model, while anxiolytic agents that are less effective in reducing panic attacks do not have a strong effect on flight, suggesting good predictive validity. However, the main drawback of this model is its relative complexity, and it has not been widely adopted to date. Panic responses can also be evoked artificially in rats by electrical stimulation of the dorsal periaqueductal grey matter (dPAG). As the dPAG harbors a hypoxia sensitive alarm system, this model is most relevant to the putative respiratory subtype of panic disorder. 
Fear-Like Behavior. Unconditioned fear responses to predators can also be measured in the defense battery tests for rats or mice. In both cases, freezing behavior is observed in the blocked runway when the predator approaches up to a certain point. Further approach is followed by active defensive attack. 
Conditioned fear responses have traditionally been studied to elucidate the neural basis of learning and memory, but are increasingly used to study normal and pathological defensive behaviors. In the basic fear conditioning setup, experimenters consistently present a conditioned stimulus (a tone or a light) before an aversive unconditioned stimulus (typically a mild foot shock). After repeated pairings, the subject will be able to predict presentation of the aversive stimulus when the conditioned stimulus is 

========892========

presented. Conditioned fear can be measured in the fear potentiated startle paradigm, where presentation of the conditioned stimulus potentiates the locomotor response to a loud startle tone. This procedure can be used in both rodents and humans with minor adaptations. Alternatively, conditioned fear is often measured in rodents in enclosed environments as a freezing response. Although both tests can be confounded by manipulations that affect locomotion in opposite ways, when a pharmacological manipulation reduces fear potentiated startle and increases locomotion by reducing freezing, the results can be interpreted as fear-reducing with confidence. 
Generalization of conditioned fear is a learning phenomenon that refers to the transfer of conditioned fear responses from the proper conditioned stimulus that predicts an aversive outcome to stimuli that are related, but distinct. Theoretically, putative abnormal generalization of conditioned fear to related stimuli is an attractive explanation for the pervasiveness of defensive responses in panic disorder and PTSD. Operationally, rodents, NHPs, or humans can be tested for the generalization of conditioned fear by presenting stimuli that are more or less similar to the original conditioned stimulus, and measuring fear responses. 
Extinction of conditioned fear is another learning phenomenon that has clear relevance to clinical psychiatry. In this procedure, after fear conditioning in rodents, NHPs, or humans, the conditioned stimulus is presented repeatedly in the absence of the unconditioned stimulus, gradually reducing conditioned fear responses. This procedure has a clear parallel in exposure therapy that is used to successfully treat generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobias, and PTSD. Pharmacological treatments that increase extinction such as D-cycloserine have been shown to enhance the beneficial effect of exposure therapy. 
Anxiety-Like Behavior. The most common way to measure anxiety-like behavior in rodents is based on approach–avoidance conflicts. Rats and mice are naturally cautious in open, elevated, and brightly lit environments because of the risk of predation, and the avoidance of such places can be a measure of anxiety-like behavior. Typically, animals are allowed to explore an apparatus with an enclosed or dark compartment, and a more open or brightly lit or elevated compartment. The elevated plus-maze, light dark exploration, and open field tests are the most popular tests in this category. There is also a human version of the open field test, called the human behavioral pattern monitor, which combines free exploration of a novel environment with presentation of novel objects, thus allowing for translational studies of anxiety-like behavior. In addition, the elevated plus-maze has been adapted to measure stretch-attend postures, reflecting risk assessment. Tests of approach–avoidance behavior have been criticized as a test of anxiety-like behavior, as drugs may affect the drive to 

========893========

explore independently of anxiety, which could be misinterpreted as an anxiety-like phenotype. In addition, these tests have been developed to test the anxiolytic effect of benzodiazepine drugs, and might therefore not be very effective at detecting novel anxiolytics that work through alternative mechanisms. Indeed, clinically effective serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) generally do not have strong anxiolytic effects in approach–avoidance tests. 
A second approach to study anxiety-like behavior is through conflict tests, in which hungry or thirsty animals are punished with a mild electric shock for lever pressing for food (Geller–Seifter conflict test) or licking a spout for water respectively (Vogel conflict test). The resulting suppression of appetitive behavior is taken as anxiety-like behavior and is sensitive to anxiolytic drugs. 
In the shock probe burying test for rats, animals are confronted with an electrified probe that delivers shocks on contact. Defensive burying of the probe with bedding material serves as the measure of anxiety-like effects. Defensive burying is also measured as anxiety-like behavior in the marble burying test, where animals are presented with novel marbles in a cage with bedding. 
Importantly, there are tests for anxiety-like responses that do not measure anxiety-like responses as behavioral inhibition, as general sedative effects might be mistaken for anxiolytic effects in the tests described above. In the stress-induced hyperthermia test, animals are stressed with rectal placement of a thermometer, and the gradual increase in body temperature is measured as index of the effect of stress. In addition, light-enhanced startle is a test that uses a continuous bright light in the startle chamber, which gradually potentiates the startle response. 
Social Anxiety-Like Behavior. Several tests of social anxiety have been developed in rodents and NHPs. In the social interaction test for rats and mice, two animals are either allowed to interact freely or through a wire bar enclosure. Time spent interacting with a con-specific is quantified, and treatments that increase interaction time are considered anxiolytic. In addition, ultrasonic distress vocalizations are social signals that serve to indicate distress, and such signals in pups separated from mothers, or in mature animals in distressing conditions, can be taken as a measure of anxiety. 
Although the most common animal models of anxiety are based on rat or mouse studies, the human intruder test for primates is well validated and offers particularly good face and constructs validity as a model of human social anxiety. In this test, confined macaque or marmoset primates are confronted with the presence of a human who does not look at them directly. The mere presence of the human introducer causes behavioral inhibition, aggression, and displacement stress responses, such as 

========894========

scratching and autogrooming. The behavior of animals in this test has been shown to be sensitive to clinically effective anxiolytic drugs. 
Depressive Behaviors 
Reduced Effort to Escape Aversive Stimuli. Hopelessness is critical symptom of depression, and the rodent forced swim test is probably the most widely used acute behavioral screen for antidepressant activity. In this test, rodents are placed in a cylinder filled with water, and while the animals will initially try to escape the cylinder with vigorous escape movements, eventually the animals will show immobility. Antidepressant effects are inferred by an increase in the time spent in escape movements. A related task for mice is the tail-suspension test, in which mice are hung by the end of their tail and a similar transition from active escape movements to immobility occurs. Various classes of clinically effective antidepressants produce acute reductions in immobility in these tests, suggesting good predictive validity. In addition, lower doses of antidepressants show an effect after chronic but not acute treatment, in line with the delayed effectiveness of antidepressants for humans. It has been observed that the forced swim test has been developed to detect the effects of antidepressants, and so it is unclear whether this test will measure putative clinically effective antidepressant treatments that operate through a different mechanism of action. In the learned helplessness paradigm, uncontrollable stress has been shown the lead to reductions in escape attempts in subsequent situations where the stressor can actually be evaded. Such escape deficits are also reversible by antidepressant drugs. 
Reduced Effort to Obtain Rewards. Anhedonia, or the loss of interest in otherwise rewarding activities, is also a key symptom of depression, which can be modeled in rodents. Preference for palatable sucrose over water, or the maximum number of lever presses an animal is willing to expand to obtain food in the progressive ratio test, can both provide measures of anhedonia. In addition, chronic implantation of ICSS electrodes in reward centers of the brain can allow for repeated measures of the threshold current at which animals are willing to self-stimulate, thus allowing for a more robust measure of reward function. 
Chronic Stress Models. Finally, antidepressant activity can also be measured in rodent tests that use chronic stress manipulations. In the chronic mild stress paradigm, experimenters administer various mild unpredictable stressors for prolonged periods, and the effect of chronic stress can be measured as reduced sucrose preference and reduced grooming behavior in mice. Although the chronic mild stress model has good face and predictive validity, attempts to establish the model in different laboratories have not always been successful. 

========895========

In the chronic social defeat model, subject mice are introduced in the home environment of a bigger mouse each day for 10 days. The sequential defeat experience leads to a relative avoidance of a novel mouse in the social interaction test, as well as reduced sucrose preference. The study of susceptible and resilient animals in the chronic social defeat stress model has yielded interesting insights into the molecular biology underlying this behavior. 
POSITIVE VALENCE 
Mania 
Sleep disturbance often triggers manic episodes in bipolar patients, and sleep deprivation paradigms in rodents can produce short-term effects that resemble some aspects of mania, such as hyperactivity, stereotypy, insomnia, aggressive behavior, and hypersexuality. Typically, rats or mice are placed in a small platform surrounded by water that does not allow for sleep without falling into the water, and 72 hours of sleep deprivation is sufficient to produce a brief manic-like state. Interestingly, these behaviors are sensitive to chronic treatment of mood stabilizing drugs such as lithium. In addition, acute amphetamine injections in rats have been used to induce hyperactivity. 
Impulsivity 
Impulsivity can broadly be divided into actions that are initiated prematurely or without appropriate cognitive control, and actions that favor options with short-term payoff, without taking longer term consequences into consideration. 
Impulsive Action. Behavioral inhibition can be measured in rodents, NHPs, and humans in the stop signal reaction time task. In the rat version, animals are trained to respond to a Go stimulus, unless a No-go stimulus is concurrently presented. The No-go stimulus is presented at various delays after the Go stimulus, enabling a quantification of the maximal delay at which a prepotent response can still be stopped. Clinically effective anti- impulsive drugs such as methylphenidate and atomoxetine decrease reaction time in both rodents and humans. Another test for impulsive action is embedded in the 5-choice serial reaction time task for rats. In this visuospatial attention task, after trial initiation, animals are faced with a standard intertrial interval before a visual stimulus prompts the correct response. When this intertrial interval is lengthened, the rats tend to show premature responses, indicative of motor impulsivity. Clinically effective anti-impulsive medications generally reduce premature responses in this task. Thus, both measures of motor impulsivity have good face and predictive validity, but their operation requires substantial training. 

========896========

Impulsive Choice. Impulsive choices can be measured in delayed discounting paradigms in rodents, NHPs, and humans. Typically, subjects can choose between one option that results in an immediate small reward and another option that results in a delayed larger reward. The relative discounting of future rewards can be deduced from choice behavior and can serve as an index of impulsivity. In animals, delayed reinforcement can only be delivered through experience. In contrast, human studies can use either experience of actual delayed rewards inside the timeframe of the experiment or description of future rewards (outside of the timeframe of the lab visit). Clearly, animal experiments can best be compared with human studies using experience of delayed outcomes. Clinically effective anti-impulsivity drugs such as atomoxetine and methylphenidate have been shown to reduce choice of smaller immediate rewards. 
Compulsive Behaviors 
Repetitive invariant behavior with no apparent function or goal can easily be measured in its natural context. For example, barbering in mice, circling behaviors in dogs and rocking, and scratching or head banging in monkeys can occur naturally in stressful situations. Experimentally induced forms of compulsive behaviors include burying of unfamiliar objects such as marbles, and the exaggerated drinking behavior that is observed in rats that respond for food under a lean fixed time schedule of reinforcement (schedule induced polydipsia). Both types of compulsive behaviors respond well to clinically effective SSRIs treatment for patients suffering from OCD. 
More complex cognitive measure of perseverative responding can be obtained in operant tasks for rodents and primates. Continued responding to a previously reinforced lever in reversal learning is one such measure of perseverative responding. An analogous measure in the 5-choice serial reaction time task is based on repeated responding to a previously rewarded magazine. Signal attenuation is a similar, but more complex, task that involves lever pressing by rats that are presented with a sensory signal to mark reward delivery. When that cue is then presented without reward delivery (cue-extinction), subsequent lever pressing under extinction conditions is not always accompanied by magazine entries to check for food rewards. The resulting lever pressing is considered to be perseverative. Of these three cognitive tasks, signal attenuation is most responsive to clinically effective SSRIs. 
Abnormal Eating 
The combination of under-eating, over activity and severe weight loss that is often seen in anorexia nervosa patients can be modeled in rodents. In the activity-based anorexia model, rats or mice are allowed to exercise in a running wheel, while food is only available for a limited amount of time per 

========897========

day. Paradoxically, access to the running wheel decreases food intake, which combines to produce severe weight loss that can lead to self- starvation. To date, no pharmacotherapies have been approved for the treatment of anorexia nervosa, so it is not clear what the predictive validity of this model is. 
Excessive calorie intake can be measured by feeding rats or mice high fat and carbohydrate food in the so-called cafeteria diet, which induces gradual weight gain and various metabolic changes. Binge eating models restrict access to highly palatable food to short periods of time, and rats and mice show considerable increases in the intake of the highly palatable food over time, while intake of normal chow food decreases. 
Substance Abuse 
Drug Reward. Drug reward can be investigated in simple form by administering drugs of abuse to rodents and measuring the behavioral consequences. In the conditioned place preference test, drugs are repeatedly injected when the animal is confined to one of two compartments, while control injections are paired with the alternative compartment. Subsequently, in a free exploration test, animals will generally spend more time in the drug-paired environment, which is taken as an index of conditioned drug reward. Although this test is relatively simple to administer, it has limited face validity because the critical pathology of substance abuse is that patients actively seek out and control drug consumption. Another way to quantify the rewarding effects of drugs of abuse is to use the ICSS procedure, where a rewarding effect of drug is measured as a decrease in ICSS reward threshold. 
Drug Self-Administration 
Rodents and NHPs can be trained to orally or intravenously, via indwelling catheters, self-administer drugs of abuse. Animals will self-administer almost all drugs with abuse potential, except for hallucinogens like D- lysergic acid die thylamide (LSD). In the simplest form, stable drug self- administration can be established by requiring the animal to perform a simple response, and the effect of environmental, pharmacological, or genetic manipulations on self-administration can be studied. There are numerous behavioral manipulations, including altering the response requirements, which can be implemented to better understand variables that influence the willingness of the animal to seek or consume the drug. For example, a dose–response function can be established to assess changes in sensitivity to drug dosing (leftward or rightward shift), or the reinforcing effect of the drug (upward or downward shift). The progressive ratio is a related test that measures the maximal number of lever presses animals are willing to emit to obtain a fixed dose of the drug. Although 

========898========

intake of drugs of abuse tends to be well controlled and stable in short daily sessions, extended access to many drugs of abuse leads to a progressive escalation of drug intake over days. Finally, after prolonged drug self- administration, some animals will continue to seek drugs when their drug- seeking responses result in contingent punishment such as foot shock, suggesting compulsive drug seeking. 
Substance abusers typically attempt to quit drug consumption, but often fail to do so, and many models of addiction involve an abstinence phase after self-administration. Immediately after cessation of self- administration, animals may undergo psychological or physical withdrawal symptoms. After a period of abstinence or extinction of the drug-seeking response, reinstatement of drug seeking can be precipitated by the drug- seeking context, response-contingent presentation of the drug-paired cue, stressors like foot shock, or administration of the drug by the experimenter. Incubation of craving refers to the finding that the magnitude of reinstatement tends to increase with the duration of abstinence. Finally, although most drug self-administration tests are based on free operant procedures, discrete trial procedures allow for discrete choice between drugs of abuse and natural rewards. 
There are few effective and approved medications for the various substance abuse disorders, so it is mostly difficult to evaluate the predictive validity of substance abuse models. However, since substance abuse in humans is the result of prolonged substance consumption, these models have excellent face and construct validity. 
COGNITION 
Preattentive Processing 
Prior to conscious processing, sensory information is selected and processed in the brain to facilitate further analysis. Preattentive processing can be measured in rodents, NHPs, and humans in the prepulse inhibition test. In this test, a loud startle tone is preceded by a less loud pretone with a specific latency. The presentation of the less loud pretone leads to an inhibition of the startle response to the loud tone, thus producing prepulse inhibition. Prepulse inhibition is not only disrupted in psychotic schizophrenia patients but also in many other psychiatric patients. Antipsychotic activity of therapeutic agents can be measured in combination with administration of dopaminergic agents that impair prepulse inhibition, such as apomorphine. The P50 response is a similar measure of preattentive processing in rodents and humans. In this test, two identical auditory stimuli are presented in quick succession, and the second stimulus normally produces a less strong P50 event related potential. 
Attention 

========899========

Training subjects to report the presentation of discrete signals over prolonged periods of time, typically tests attention, or the process of selectively focusing on specific information. There are several sustained attention tasks for rodents, based on analogous continuous performance tasks for humans. These tasks differ somewhat in that humans typically do not undergo training before testing. In the aforementioned 5-choice serial reaction time task, rats are trained to report the presentation of a stimulus light in one of five locations. In the behavioral vigilance task, rats are required to report the presence or absence of a visual stimulus by different responses, and background noise is used to increase the difficulty of the task. 
Working Memory 
The capacity to transiently hold on to and process new and already stored information can be tested in rodents, NHPs, and humans. Behavioral models of working memory depend on a delay between information that informs correct responding and the opportunity to execute the response. 
In delayed alternation tasks, rats are trained to select alternating arms in a T-maze, either based on sequential free choice or with alternating forced choices and free choice trials. In the radial arm maze, eight arms are baited with a food reward, and the frequency of reentry in already visited arms serves as an index of working memory function. Operant delayed nonmatching to place is another rodent task that has a direct primate analogue. In this task, rats or mice are presented with a stimulus lever (right or left) that is subsequently retracted, and after a variable delay the animals have to press the alternative lever in order to earn a reward. 
Rodent models can provide valuable information on the neural basis of working memory, and can serve as a first screen for potential new drugs. However, evolutionary differences in cognitive capacity and prefrontal cortex architecture suggest that NHP models of working memory provide a closer approximation of human working memory. Primate tests of working memory focus on spatial or object working memory, which depend on dissociable parts of the prefrontal cortex. In the spatial task, a reward is presented in one of several locations, after which a screen is lowered for various delays, and when the screen is lifted up, the animal can find a reward if it looks in the same location. In the delayed match to sample object task, primates are presented with multiple objects, and they have to select the matching object after a delay in order to be rewarded. Critically, the objects have to be reused frequently for the same animals, so that they cannot solve the task based on recognition memory. The CANTAB cognitive test battery for humans contains an analogous task. 
Declarative Memory 

========900========

Animal models of declarative memories have been developed for rodents and NHPs. The Morris water maze for rats tests spatial learning and memory. Rats are introduced at varying start locations in a large swimming pool with opaque water with a hidden submerged platform. Over multiple trials, rats will learn to swim to the platform regardless of the fact that their starting location is constantly varied. Subsequently, when the platform is removed, the rats will spend more time swimming in the location where the platform was previously located, indicating good spatial memory. The spontaneous object recognition task for rats is based on a sampling phase with two identical and novel objects at two ends of a y-maze. After a variable retention delay, one of the objects is replaced by a new object, and rats with intact memory will naturally explore the novel object more. The most popular NHP model of object recognition is the delayed nonmatch to sample task. The basic setup of the task is similar to the object working memory task described above, except that the objects are new to the animal at the time of testing, so that the task can be solved based on recognition memory. 
SOCIAL FUNCTIONING 
There are many rodent tests of social functioning. In addition to social anxiety-like behavior described above, there are specific models of social attachment, dominance, and aggression. 
Social Attachment 
Mother–infant attachment is often studied in rodents in the homing test, where pups at postnatal days 8 to 10 are separated from their mothers, and allowed to choose between bedding from their own nest and bedding from another age-matched litter. The pups will prefer bedding from their own nest, indicating normal social function. Similarly, isolated pups will emit specific ultrasonic vocalizations upon separation from the mother. Further in development, the social functioning of mice can be assessed in the social preference test, in which the time spent near a confined social stimulus versus a nonsocial stimulus (social preference) or familiar social stimulus versus novel social stimulus (novelty preference) can be measured. In addition, social interactions can also be studied in freely interacting con- specifics. Social play in young animals can be quantified in rats by placing two unfamiliar young rats together and observing the frequency of species- specific playful behavior. In addition, the rewarding qualities of social play can be quantified by a place preference procedure. Finally, the formation of monogamous pair-bonds between partners is often studied in another rodent species: the prairie vole. If a male prairie vole stays with the female for 1 day after mating, they will form a lifelong pair-bond, even to the extent that males will not seek a new mate after the female dies. 

========901========

Social Hierarchy and Aggression 
Both mice and rats tend to form stable hierarchies in the natural setting and engage in aggressive behaviors under particular circumstances. Male aggression tends to occur between males in order to establish dominance hierarchies and toward intruders in order to protect reproductive success. Female aggression in rodents tends to occur specifically postpartum to protect offspring. Dominance and aggression can be observed in natural and seminatural settings such as the visible burrow system. Dominance hierarchies can also be studied in mice in the tube test, in which pairs of mice are placed opposite of each other at the ends of a tube, and the mouse that forces the other mouse to retreat is considered to be the dominant mouse. Further, aggression is often provoked by the resident intruder test, sometimes after social isolation, which enhances resident aggression. 
SLEEP AND AROUSAL 
Arousal 
Arousal and hyperactivity can be measured in rats and mice, typically through automated analysis of locomotor behavior in the home cage or in testing equipment like the open field test. Such tests can quantify overall movement and the relative occurrence of rest and activity. 
Sleep 
Natural Sleep. Natural sleeping behaviors are most often studied in rats and mice. Rodent models of sleep have been informative for human sleep regulation; however, unlike humans, rodents tend to sleep during the dark phase and show highly fragmented sleep episodes. Thus, results from rodent experiments should be interpreted with some caution. Sleep can be quantified on the basis of behavioral observation or electroencephalographic (EEG) measures. More detailed analyses focus on the amount of sleep per day and the temporal distribution of sleep. 
Insomnia. Inability to sleep has been modeled in rats and mice through the effects of stress manipulations on sleep architecture. Stressors may include immobilization, social stress, or fear conditioning, and these manipulations generally prolong the latency to fall asleep, reduce sleep duration, and increase fragmentation of sleep. Most of these changes are reversible by the sleep medications. 
Narcolepsy. Drowsiness during normal waking hours and sudden attacks of sleep have been modeled successfully in dogs and rodents. There are several strains of dogs that have naturally occurring narcolepsy, and the investigation of the genetic determinants of narcolepsy in dogs led to the identification of the orexin 2 receptor and its natural peptide ligand orexin 

========902========

as critical for normal arousal and wakefulness. Sudden arrest of movement, or cataplexy, is a hallmark of narcolepsy and can be measured in dogs in the food-elicited cataplexy test, in which bits of food are placed along a semicircle and sudden arrests in movement are taken as partial or complete cataplexy. 
Analogous mouse models of cataplexy have been developed to facilitate the investigation of the effect of genetic manipulations on arousal and sleep systems. In susceptible mice, cataplexy can be elicited by various manipulations including anticipation of food, wheel running, and social interactions. Rodent cataplexy can be measured as brief episodes of behavioral immobility, in particular atonia of muscles in the back of the neck and a sleep-like EEG signature. 
Sexual Function 
Normal Sexual Behavior. Normal and dysfunctional sexual behavior have most often been studied in rodents. Although sexual interaction in rodents has important species-specific components, such as a strong role for olfaction and a series of approaches and withdrawals that does not typically occur in humans, many aspects of sexual behavior are preserved between rodents and humans. Normal sexual function can be characterized in rodents by observation studies, and male ultrasonic vocalizations toward females can be measured, in addition to approach, female lordosis, mounting, intromission, and ejaculation. 
Sexual Dysfunction. Although not often studied, stress can have detrimental effects on male sexual behaviors in rats, leading to longer latencies to mounting and intromission, but shorter latencies to ejaculation. In addition, there are many models of male erectile dysfunction that are based on physiological manipulations, such as cavernous nerve damage. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The value of animal models rests on their ability to reveal insights into psychological and neural processes that contribute to psychiatric disorders in humans, largely reflected by their success in facilitating the development of novel and efficacious therapeutics. The complement of behaviors displayed by rodents, and alterations in those behaviors resulting from perturbations in brain processes, is often very different from those observed in humans. This highlights the difficulties and challenges in modeling human psychiatric illness based primarily on behavior in rodents and other nonhuman species. The advent of optogenetic and chemogenetic technologies has provided powerful new mechanisms to modify discrete brain circuits in laboratory animals. Similarly, methods to manipulate 

========903========

brain circuits in humans continue to improve, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), DBS, and emerging new technologies. It seems likely that progress in understanding biological processes relevant to psychiatry will be seen when there is a better understanding of the impact of manipulating activity of brain circuits in humans and nonhuman species relevant to the five broad classes of symptoms identified by NIMH and outlined above. Those behaviors that show consistent cross-species alterations in response to manipulating symptom-relevant brain circuits are likely to be those that yield better insights to psychiatric illness and support new medications development. Also important for future progress in animal modeling of psychiatric will be the ability to introduce alleles into the genomes of laboratory animals that in humans are associated with the risk of psychiatric illness. Emerging genome editing technologies that permit the introduction of one of more risk alleles into specific populations of neurons in laboratory animals will likely drive better understanding of precisely how psychiatric disorders develop in humans, and the behaviors in nonhuman laboratory rodents that may reflect the impact of such risk alleles on the functioning of impacted brain circuits. 
REFERENCES 
Agmo A. Animal models of female sexual dysfunction: basic considerations on drugs, arousal, motivation and behavior. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2014;121:3–15. 
Belin D, Jonkman S, Dickinson A, Robbins TW, Everitt BJ. Parallel and interactive processes within the basal ganglia: relevance for the understanding of addiction. Behav Brain Res. 2009;199:89–102. 
Blanchard RJ, Flannelly KJ, Blanchard CD. Life-span studies of dominance and aggression in established colonies of laboratory rats. Physiol Behav. 1988;43:1–7. 
Blanchard CD, Griebel G, Blanchard RJ. The mouse defense test battery: pharmacological and behavioral assays for anxiety and panic. European J Pharm. 2003;463:97–116. 
Burkett JP, Young LJ. The behavioral, anatomical and pharmacological parallels between social attachment, love and addiction. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2012;224:1–26. 
Camilla D’Angelo LC, Eagle DM, Grant JE, Fineberg NA, Robbins TW, Chamberlain SR. Animal models of obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders. CNS Spectr. 2014;19:28–49. 
Castner SA, Goldman-Rakic PS, Williams GV. Animal models of working memory: insights for targeting cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2004;174:111– 125. 
Chung E, De Young L, Brock GB. Investigative models in erectile dysfunction: a state-of-the-art review of current animal models. J Sex Med. 2011;8:3291–3305. 
Coleman K, Pierre PJ. Assessing anxiety in nonhuman primates. ILAR J. 2014;55:333–346. *Cryan JF, Holmes A. The ascent of mouse: advances in modelling human depression and anxiety. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2005;4:775–790. 
Cryan JF, Markou A, Lucki I. Assessing antidepressant activity in rodents: recent developments and future needs. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2002;23:238–245. 

========904========

*Cuthbert BN, Insel TR. Toward the future of psychiatric diagnosis: the seven pillars of RDoC. BMC Med. 2013;11:126. 
*Eichenbaum H. Exploring declarative memory using animal models. In: The Cognitive Neuroscience of Memory: An Introduction. New York: Oxford University Press; 2011. *Evenden JL. Varieties of impulsivity. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1999;146:348–361. Gestel van MA, Kostrzewa E, Adan RAH, Janhunen SK. Pharmacological manipulations in animal models of anorexia and binge eating in relation to humans. Br J Pharmacol. 2014;171:4767–4784. 
Griebel G, Holmes A. 50 years of hurdles and hope in anxiolytic drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013;12:667–687. 
Hyman SE. Revitalizing psychiatric therapeutics. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014;39:220– 229. 
Hyman SE, Malenka RC, Nestler EJ. Neural mechanisms of addiction: the role for reward-related learning and memory. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2006;29:565–598. 
Markou A, Chiamulera C, Geyer MA, Tricklebank M, Steckler T. Removing obstacles in neuroscience drug discovery: the future path for animal models. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009;34:74–89. 
Miczek KA, Maxson SC, Fish EW, Faccidomo S. Aggressive behavioral phenotypes in mice. Behav Brain Res. 2001;125:167–181. 
Oddi D, Crusio WE, D’Amato FR, Pietropaolo S. Monogenic mouse models of social dysfunction: implications for autism. Behav Brain Res. 2013;251:75–84. 
Peleg-Raibstein D, Feldom J, Meyer U. Behavioral models of antipsychotic drug actions. In: Current Antipsychotics, Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. Heidelberg: Springer- Verlag; 2012. 
*Sarter M, Givens B, Bruno JP. The cognitive neuroscience of sustained attention: where top- down meets bottom-up. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2001;35:146–160. 
Schenberg LC, Schimitel FG, de Souza Armini R, et al. Translational approach to studying panic disorder in rats: hits and misses. Neurosci Biobehavioral Rev. 2014;46:472–496. 
Shaham Y, Shalev U, Lu L, de Wit H, Stewart J. The reinstatement model of drug relapse: history, methodology and major findings. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2003;168:3–20. 
Toth LA, Bhargava P. Animal models of sleep disorders. Comp Med. 2013;63:91–104. 
Wang F, Zhu J, Zhu H, Zhang Q, Lin Z, Hu H. Bidirectional control of social hierarchy by synaptic efficacy in medial prefrontal cortex. Science. 2011;334:693–697. 

========905========

▲ 1.20 Pain Systems: Interface with Affective and Motivational Mechanisms 
JON-KAR ZUBIETA, M.D., PH.D. 
INTRODUCTION 
Pain is a cardinal symptom of many somatic diseases. Acutely, it serves to warn of danger and shapes behavior to avoid the environment eliciting the stimulus. It is also a subjective experience that incorporates not only sensory (e.g., intensity, location, quality), but also affective and cognitive dimensions. Its chronification is associated with adaptive and maladaptive neurobiological changes that serve to perpetuate the experience, and leads to an increase in its aversive and motivational significance. In individuals for whom acute pain transitions into a persistent condition, its experience no longer serves a protective role and is frequently associated with the development of depression and anxiety comorbid conditions in approximately 50 percent of cases, with bidirectional exacerbation. 
While the modulation of acute pain can be achieved pharmacologically by the introduction of agents that reduce nociceptive input (e.g., opioid compounds, pharmacological conduction blockade and modulation, monoamine reuptake inhibitors), the relief of persistent pain is not adequately achieved in many conditions, particularly those without an obvious or identifiable pathophysiology (e.g., fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome, nonneuropathic back pain). The negative effects of chronic opioid use have received much attention because of the development of tolerance to these compounds, withdrawal symptoms and their potential for misuse, albeit it remains a commonly used strategy. The potentiation of monoaminergic neurotransmission through inhibition of the reuptake or similar mechanisms, together with agents that reduce inflammatory responses and neuronal excitability remain the main nonopioid strategies to reduce pain severity and comorbidity, albeit they rarely completely eliminate the experience of pain once it becomes persistent. 
PAIN SYSTEMS 
Pain perception is typically initiated by the activation of peripheral nociceptors, sensory end organs in the skin, muscle, joints, and viscera that selectively respond to noxious or potentially damaging stimuli. An important property of nociceptors is that they sensitize as a consequence of tissue injury and inflammation, reducing their threshold of response and increasing the magnitude of their responses to noxious stimulation. Nociceptor endings in tissue are unencapsulated (“free”) and are commonly associated with medium diameter myelinated Aδ axons which transmit 

========906========

acute, well-localized “first pain” signals, or with small diameter, unmyelinated slowly conducting C fibers that convey poorly localized, “second pain,” “burning,” or slow pain. Aδ and C nociceptors are further subdivided into multimodal or more specialized types, responding to mechanical, chemical, or heat stimuli with varying degrees of sensitivity. Larger, rapidly conducting myelinated Aβ fibers respond to innocuous mechanical stimulation such as touch. 
The cell bodies of the nociceptors are located in the dorsal root ganglia, or in the trigeminal ganglion in the case of the facial area, and are organized into anatomically distinct laminae. Axonal projections from these neurons transmit information through excitatory glutamatergic and peptidergic neurotransmission to second-order neurons of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Second-order neuron axons then cross contralaterally and form ascending pathways that synapse in the brainstem (spinoreticulothalamic tract) and thalamic nuclei (spinothalamic tract), thought to respectively subserve less localized and more sensory- discriminative (e.g., intensity and localization) elements of pain. 
Spinoreticulothalamic projections to the rostroventral medulla (RVM) and periaqueductal gray (PAG) engage descending pain inhibitory pathways in feedback loops that regulate dorsal horn neuronal excitability, while thalamic nuclei project to cortical structures. Other spinoreticulothalamic projections reach the parabrachial nucleus of the pons, which is directly connected to the amygdala, a region implicated in the representation and modulation of aversive, affectively negative elements of the pain experience, and which provides further input to the insular cortex. 
The regulatory functions of the PAG and RVM have received much attention since they are engaged as a modulatory mechanism of the nociceptive signal which is heavily influenced by neurotransmitters such as the enkephalinergic endogenous opioid, serotonin, and norepinephrine, among others. These are the targets of commonly used pain control agents, such as the monoamine reuptake inhibitor antidepressants, and the opioid medications. Pain signal to the PAG activate excitatory and peptidergic transmission which projects to the RVM. In the RVM, “on” cells become activated in response to noxious painful stimuli and are involved in the formation of protective “nocifensive” behaviors, such as withdrawal reflexes. “Off” cells, on the other hand, respond acutely to endogenous opioids, GABA, and serotonin, to induce analgesic responses through descending connections to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Norepinephrine, through alpha 1 and alpha 2 receptors, respectively, can have both pro- and antinociceptive effects, by modulation of “on” and “off” cells of the RVM (Fig. 1.20–1). 

========907========

FIGURE 1.20–1. Descending pain modulatory system. NCF, nucleus cuneiformis; PAG, periaqueductal gray; DLPT, dorsolateral pontine tegmentum; ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; +/− indicates both pro- and antinociceptive influences, respectively. (From Tracey I, Mantyh PW. The cerebral signature for pain perception and its modulation. Neuron. 2007;55(3):377–391.) 
Thalamic input reaching the somatosensory cortex is implicated in sensory-discriminatory functions, while projections to regions such as the anterior cingulate and insular cortex are thought to integrate sensory and 

========908========

emotional aspects of the experience. Often referred as “lateral” (sensory- discriminatory) and medial (affective–cognitive) projections, they form a large distributed brain network, “pain matrix” that reflects and processes the complex, multifaceted experience of pain. During acute pain, primary and secondary somatosensory cortices, insular cortex, anterior cingulate, and prefrontal cortices become consistently activated. Basal ganglia, amygdala, and hippocampus are also involved in these processes. 
It should noted that many of these “medial projection” integrative areas overlap with those implicated in the representation of other, nonpainful, salient or stressful stimuli, and are thought to be dysregulated when pain becomes persistent, chronic, reflecting alterations in reward and motivational mechanisms observed in persistent pain conditions. Notably among these, anterior insular, anterior cingulate, and prefrontal cortices, as well as the nucleus accumbens and amygdala are thought to be implicated in the representation and regulation of emotional, motivational, and evaluative aspects of the pain experience and will be discussed in further detail in the following paragraphs. Conversely, ventrolateral thalamus, somatosensory cortex, dorsal posterior insula, and some, but not all, cellular groups of the anterior cingulate and anterior insular cortex are thought to be more pain-specific, responding to variations in pain intensity and being differentially activated by pain stimuli as opposed to non–pain- specific sensory stimuli or other components of the experience of pain. In addition to the modulatory role of the PAG and RVM on nociceptive suppression, telencephalic regions that include the DLPFC, anterior cingulate and insular cortices, thalamus, nucleus accumbens, amygdala are implicated in regulating the pain experience across sensory, unpleasantness, and affective components through the local activation of endogenous opioid and other neurotransmitter systems such as the noradrenergic, GABA, endocannabinoid, and glycinergic, as well as through descending projections to the PAG and RVM (Fig. 1.20–2). 

========909========

FIGURE 1.20–2. Neuroanatomy of pain processing. Brain regions that activate during a painful experience, with bilateral representation (contralateral to the noxious stimulus). (From Tracey I, Mantyh PW. The cerebral signature for pain perception and its modulation. Neuron. 2007;55(3):377–391.) 
PAIN AND MOTIVATIONAL MECHANISMS 
From an evolutionary perspective, pain is a strong motivational signal with negative affective connotations, while pain relief can be conceptualized as a form of relief and reward, and therefore represent potent factors directing behavior. The basal ganglia and associated limbic cortex are thought to integrate internal and external signals to encode the value of the sensory signals received. They are engaged during anticipation of pain or expectations of pain relief, and together with prefrontal cortical structures, are implicated in the integration of sensory information but also the modulation of pain through endogenous opioid modulatory systems. 
During acute pain, brain functional activity of the saliency/reward/motivation network, which includes the orbitofrontal 

========910========

cortex, nucleus accumbens, and VTA, is increased and associated with the capacity to express endogenous opioid analgesia in humans. Interindividual variations in the capacity of the nucleus accumbens to respond to reward value have been further linked to the capacity to develop placebo-induced analgesic responses, suggesting that reward and saliency evaluation mechanisms are also engaged to induce appropriate analgesic responses when required to maintain homeostasis. 
The nucleus accumbens receives pain information through regions involved in pain and emotional processing, such as the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, and the amygdala, and direct projections from spinal cord neurons to the nucleus accumbens have been described. During experimental pain in humans, dopamine neurotransmission is activated in the basal ganglia. In dorsal regions, receiving input from somatosensory cortex, dopamine is released in a manner proportional to the intensity and sensory elements of the pain signal, while in the nucleus accumbens it was related to negative affective responses in humans. This effect appears to be localized in the nucleus accumbens core, based on animal model data, while in the shell area of this region, it is released after pain stimulus termination. This is consistent with the concept that pain relief represents a form of positive reinforcement upon its termination, as shown using neuroimaging data in humans diagnosed with persistent pain. The transition from injury and acute pain to persistent low back pain in humans has been further associated with alterations in the functional connectivity of the basal ganglia to prefrontal cortical structures, suggesting that persistent pain-induced alterations in motivational systems from a critical part in the perpetuation of the experience of pain in humans. 
In patients diagnosed with persistent pain conditions, such as fibromyalgia and chronic back pain, dopamine receptors and dopaminergic neurotransmission in the nucleus accumbens are downregulated compared to those of healthy individuals. These reductions appear adaptive in nature, hampering the salience of the chronic noxious stimulus but also enhancing the functional capacity of downstream antinociceptive endogenous opioid mechanisms. However, dysregulation of nucleus accumbens function in the context of chronic pain have also been linked to reductions in motivation, such as the capacity to perform effortful tasks to gain rewards in animal models. Therefore, nucleus accumbens function and dopaminergic neurotransmission in this area are involved in the signaling of the negative value and salience of noxious input, and has been implicated in the transition from acute to persistent pain. Dopaminergic mechanisms also seem to become adaptively downregulated in the context of persistent pain, however with potentially negative behavioral consequences, such as the capacity to engage motivational mechanisms and the effortful pursuit of rewards, core features of anhedonia and depression. 

========911========

PAIN AND AFFECTIVE REGULATION AND DYSREGULATION 
Aside from its adaptive value as a warning signal, pain, when persistent, becomes a form of physical and emotional stressor that induces negative mood states, part of maladaptive responses to chronic noxious stimuli. Clinically significant symptoms of depression and anxiety appear in approximately half of the patients diagnosed with persistent pain conditions, and form part of the comorbid pathology associated with chronic pain. 
Brain regions such as the anterior cingulate, which receives nociceptive signals through the spinothalamic pathway, are implicated in the encoding of pain unpleasantness, which can be modulated by cognitive processes such as hypnotic suggestions and where endogenous opioid mechanisms are engaged in the context of suggestions of analgesia during placebo administration. Opioid receptors mediating endogenous opioid analgesia are found downregulated in this and other regions, such as the thalamus, nucleus accumbens, and amygdala in chronic pain states such as inflammatory, central, and neuropathic pain as well as in fibromyalgia, with accompanying enhancements in negative affective and pain unpleasantness ratings. Similarly, and in chronic back pain patients, deficits in endogenous opioid neurotransmission have been encountered in the amygdala, a region implicated in both antinociception but also responses and regulation of affectively valenced stimuli, and have been associated with both clinical pain ratings and greater negative affect. These findings parallel those encountered in patients diagnosed with major depression, and are an example of alterations in biological processes that overlap between pathologies. 
The anterior insular cortex, one of the regions that mediates responses to emotional stimuli and is implicated in the pathophysiology of depression has also been shown to have an important role in the encoding of interoceptive information in the context of pain. It has been linked to the formation of attentional biases toward physical physiological cues, including pain, and implicated in fear learning and anxiety responses to painful stimuli. Clinical interventions such as meditation-based therapies, geared toward the reduction of interoceptive sensitivity and anxiety in patients diagnosed with persistent pain have been shown to regulate anterior cingulate and anterior insular cortex in a manner proportional to clinical benefit. 
As noted above, substantial overlap exists among brain regions and neurobiological mechanisms implicated in the processing of emotionally salient stimuli and those found to represent and regulate pain signaling, consistent with the concept of persistent pain as an allostatic process that promotes negative affective responses and enhances the individual propensity to the development of depression and anxiety symptomatology. 

========912========

COGNITIVE PROCESSING AND PAIN 
The perception of pain is sensitive to mental processes such as attentional biases toward the noxious stimulus. Heightened attention and expectations of threat toward painful stimuli have been shown to induce catastrophic thinking and higher pain sensitivity. Conversely, distraction from pain and reframing of its meaning have been associated with reductions in pain- associated responses of somatosensory cortex, thalamus, insula, and ACC, with accompanying changes in sensory, cognitive, and affective appraisals of the painful stimulus. Therefore, both enhancements and reductions in pain report can be achieved by the influence of higher-order cognitive processes, effects that at least in part, take place through the top-down engagement of the PAG and descending pain modulatory circuits impacting spinal nociceptive transmission. Executive cortical regions such as the dorsolateral and VLPFC are thought to provide input to anterior cingulate, insular and thalamic circuitry, which in turn project to PAG, a region that potently influences the intensity of ascending signals from the spinal cord. 
Another example of how cognitive processes can affect pain processing is the so-called placebo analgesic effect. Besides the perspective that placebo effects confound controlled trials of potentially therapeutic agents, the information so far acquired points to neurobiological systems that when activated by positive expectations and maintained through reward learning are capable of inducing physiological changes that lead to the experience of analgesia and improvements in emotional state. This line of research has described neural networks and neurotransmitter systems implicated in the formation of placebo analgesic responses. These include the DLPFC, implicated in the processing of environmental cues and expectations, as well as VLPFC, anterior cingulate, insular cortex, nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and PAG. Salience assessments mediated by dopamine neurotransmission in the nucleus accumbens appear to engage pain regulatory networks across these regions, inducing the adaptive activation of pain and affect regulatory neurotransmitters and neural networks (or maladaptive in the case of nocebo responses, adverse effects in response to therapeutic cues). Endogenous opioids are centrally involved in these processes, but also the endocannabinoid and CCK systems. The formation of biological placebo effects therefore appear to implicate the engagement of resiliency mechanisms, with interindividual variations partially determined by genetic factors, and uncovered by the cognitive emotional integration of the expectations created by the therapeutic environment. Of note, similar mechanisms appear to take play in the formation of placebo antidepressant effects, with partial regional overlap with those engaged during the development of placebo-induced analgesia. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 

========913========

The majority of the work carried out in the study of pain perception and regulation has been concerned with the transmission of nociceptive input and its regulation at the level of peripheral, spinal, and brainstem structures, providing exquisite detail on these processes. By comparison, much less is known regarding the contribution of telencephalic mechanisms that are engaged during acute, sustained, and persistent pain, particularly in humans, and which undoubtedly contribute to chronicity and comorbidity with depression, anxiety, and alterations in reward and motivation. However, an emerging literature demonstrates substantial overlaps between neural systems engaged during pain and those that respond to other stressors, the dysregulation of which would explain the complex presentation of patients diagnosed with persistent pain conditions. Future advancements in the area will require particular attention to those interfaces to exert actual change in pain chronicity and associated neuropsychiatric symptomatology and to provide new insights into novel treatment targets for these conditions. 
REFERENCES 
Apkarian AV, Bushnell MC, Treede RD, Zubieta JK. Human brain mechanisms of pain perception and regulation in health and disease. Eur J Pain. 2005;9:463–484. 
Baliki MN, Geha PY, Fields HL, Apkarian AV. Predicting value of pain and analgesia: nucleus accumbens response to noxious stimuli changes in the presence of chronic pain. Neuron. 2010;66:149–160. 
Baliki MN, Petre B, Torbey S, Herrmann KM, Huang L, Schnitzer TJ, et al. Corticostriatal functional connectivity predicts transition to chronic back pain. Nat Neuroscience. 2012;15:1117–1119. 
Basbaum AI, Bautista DM, Scherrer G, Julius D. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain. Cell. 2009;139:267–284. 
Bushnell MC, Ceko M, Low LA. Cognitive and emotional control of pain and its disruption in chronic pain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013;14:502–511. 
Fields H. State-dependent opioid control of pain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004;5:565–575. 
Gold MS, Gebhart GF. Nociceptor sensitization in pain pathogenesis. Nat Med. 2010;16:1248– 1257. 
Harris RE, Clauw DJ, Scott DJ, McLean SA, Gracely RH, Zubieta JK. Decreased central mu- opioid receptor availability in fibromyalgia.J Neurosci. 2007;27:10000–10006. 
Hsu DT, Sanford BJ, Meyers KK, et al. It still hurts: altered endogenous opioid activity in the brain during social rejection and acceptance in major depressive disorder. Mol Psychiatry. 2015;20:193–200. 
Lutz A, McFarlin DR, Perlman DM, Salomons TV, Davidson RJ. Altered anterior insula activation during anticipation and experience of painful stimuli in expert meditators. Neuroimage. 2013;64:538–546. 
Martikainen IK, Nuechterlein EB, Pecina M, et al. Chronic back pain is associated with alterations in dopamine neurotransmission in the ventral striatum. J Neurosci. 2015;35:9957– 

========914========

9965. 
Martikainen IK, Pecina M, Love TM, et al. Alterations in endogenous opioid functional measures in chronic back pain. J Neurosci. 2013;33:14729–14737. 
Navratilova E, Porreca F. Reward and motivation in pain and pain relief. Nat Neurosci. 2014;17:1304–1312. 
Pecina M, Bohnert AS, Sikora M, et al. Association between placebo-activated neural systems and antidepressant responses: neurochemistry of placebo effects in major depression. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015;72:1087–1094. 
Pecina M, Zubieta JK. Molecular mechanisms of placebo responses in humans. Mol Psychiatry. 2015;20:416–423. 
Pertovaara A. The noradrenergic pain regulation system: a potential target for pain therapy. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013;716:2–7. 
Phan KL, Wager T, Taylor SF, Liberzon I. Functional neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion activation studies in PET and fMRI. Neuroimage. 2002;16:331–348. 
Rainville P, Carrier B, Hofbauer RK, Bushnell MC, Duncan GH. Dissociation of sensory and affective dimensions of pain using hypnotic modulation. Pain. 1999;82:159–171. 
Schwartz N, Temkin P, Jurado S, et al. Chronic pain. Decreased motivation during chronic pain requires long-term depression in the nucleus accumbens. Science. 2012;345:535–542. Scott DJ, Heitzeg MM, Koeppe RA, Stohler CS, Zubieta JK. Variations in the human pain stress experience mediated by ventral and dorsal basal ganglia dopamine activity. J Neurosci. 2006;26:10789–10795. 
Scott DJ, Stohler CS, Egnatuk CM, Wang H, Koeppe RA, Zubieta JK. Individual differences in reward responding explain placebo-induced expectations and effects. Neuron. 2007;55:325– 336. 
Scott DJ, Stohler CS, Egnatuk CM, Wang H, Koeppe RA, Zubieta JK. Placebo and nocebo effects are defined by opposite opioid and dopaminergic responses. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2008;65:220–231. 
Segerdahl AR, Mezue M, Okell TW, Farrar JT, Tracey I. The dorsal posterior insula subserves a fundamental role in human pain. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18:499–500. 
Simons LE, Elman I, Borsook D. Psychological processing in chronic pain: a neural systems approach. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2014;39:61–78. 
Smith TH, Sim-Selley LJ, Selley DE. Cannabinoid CB1 receptor-interacting proteins: novel targets for central nervous system drug discovery? Br J Pharmacol. 2010;160:454–466. Tracey I, Mantyh PW. The cerebral signature for pain perception and its modulation. Neuron. 2007;55:377–391. 
Vandenberg RJ, Ryan RM, Carland JE, Imlach WL, Christie MJ. Glycine transport inhibitors for the treatment of pain. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2014;35:423–430. 
Wager TD, Atlas LY, Lindquist MA, Roy M, Woo CW, Kross E. An fMRI-based neurologic signature of physical pain. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1388–1397. 
Wanigasekera V, Lee MC, Rogers R, et al. Baseline reward circuitry activity and trait reward responsiveness predict expression of opioid analgesia in healthy subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:17705–17710. 
Wiech K, Ploner M, Tracey I. Neurocognitive aspects of pain perception. Trends Cogn Sci. 

========915========

2008;12:306–313. 
Wood PB, Schweinhardt P, Jaeger E, et al. Fibromyalgia patients show an abnormal dopamine response to pain. Eur J Neurosci. 2007;25:3576–3582. 
Zubieta JK, Smith YR, Bueller JA, et al. mu-opioid receptor-mediated antinociceptive responses differ in men and women. J Neurosci. 2002;22:5100–5107. 
Zubieta JK, Smith YR, Bueller JM, et al. Regional mu opioid receptor regulation of sensory and affective dimensions of pain. Science. 2001;293:311–315. 
▲ 1.21 Basic Science of Self 
DEBRA A. GUSNARD, M.D. 
This chapter is intended to provide an overview of considerations for what may be regarded as a basic science of self and its relevance to psychiatry. Terminological issues are discussed first to provide some perspective on historical and other phenomena that initially complicated and then, more recently, encouraged thinking that such a “science” might be possible. It should be noted at the outset that a single paradigm for research on “self” does not exist, as separate disciplines and even different investigators within disciplines have come to the study of the individual (qua self) and its unique perspective differently. This will be apparent in the descriptions of representative scientific work that follows. Despite these differences, however, some conceptual convergence in this scientific enterprise has begun to emerge along with signs of where a more advanced program for a science of self might be heading. 
INTRODUCTION 
Stated simply, self-representation is central to human behavior in health and disease. That is, an individual’s abilities to experience and recognize his physical being as distinctly his own and to act on various kinds of self- knowledges are critical for his being able to organize and regulate his own behavior and engage well, or not so well, in social relationships. Until recently, the importance of self-representation and the value of understanding mechanisms by which it may be achieved have been generally under-appreciated in scientific circles. But this has begun to change as clinical disciplines concerned with various disorders bearing on aspects of self-representation have started to collaborate and communicate more directly with experimentalists and neuroscientists and the latter’s methods and technologies have begun to be more widely applied. 
Historically, the relative dearth of scientific studies targeting self- representation has been largely a consequence of the fact that, unlike most other domains in science where commonly agreed upon and well- elaborated conceptual frameworks guide investigation and constrain the 

========916========

interpretation of data, the scientific investigation of self-representation has not been grounded by such a framework and, as a consequence, has been a relatively fragmented enterprise. Even acknowledging the meaningfulness of such work requires an endorsement of both a naturalistic perspective and the view that self-representation includes having a functionality for individuals that, in its typical operations, serves to enhance or, in its dysfunction, may hinder their survival. In this view, forms of self- representation inhere operations that support the distinguishing and recognition of an individual’s perspective as his/her own spatiotemporal perspective as well as an individual’s sense of ownership of his/her own mental and bodily states. Clearly, these forms of self-representation and their constitutive operations are necessarily grounded in material, specifically neural processes. General appreciation of such a view is becoming more widespread so that, like the study of consciousness to which it is related, the study of various means by which individuals represent aspects of “self” to themselves is acquiring increasing acceptance. 
Certain scientific discoveries facilitated the burgeoning acceptance of such scientific inquiry. For example, the split-brain studies carried out by Roger Sperry and colleagues in the 1960s on individuals who had undergone separation of their two cerebral hemispheres by corpus callosotomy for intractable epilepsy revealed significant disconnection of the perceptions and decisions of one hemisphere from the other. These findings among others contributed to deflating the notion of a necessary unity and coherence in self and the recognition that the normal experience of such unity masks underlying neural organizational processes that may be subject to disruption and scientific manipulation. 
Recent scientific collaborations between clinical and nonclinical disciplines have also provided impetus to this burgeoning acceptance. Such collaborations have stimulated new thinking on the subject due to the required communication and resulting awareness of their inherently different, though still functionalist, perspectives on considerations of self. Philosophers of mind are sometimes invited to participate in such cross- disciplinary collaborations to assist in refining and clarifying concepts to help with the design and interpretation of experimental studies. As a result, scientific inquiry into the nature of self-representation is now broadening both across levels of description (from psychological and behavioral levels of description to neurophysiological levels of description) and in terms of relevant capacities that change across human development and may exist in other animal species as well. 
HISTORICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
To appreciate the scope of the conceptual challenges faced by current investigators in refining a scientific agenda, however, an understanding of some relevant historical forces shaping considerations of self is useful. First 

========917========

of all, the human drive to reflect upon what constitutes self has been recorded by philosophers, poets, artists, and others for millennia. But societal and cultural forces have played an important role in determining the expression of socially accepted intellectual interest in the self, so that such expression has clearly varied across time. For example, in the west, before the decline of the middle ages and the attendant decline of religion as the dominant organizational culture, emphasis was placed on the concept of community rather than on self in all aspects of social life. The significance of the community tended to overshadow the significance of individuals and their personal interests, which were viewed by the dominant culture as arising from a human nature that was inherently base and “selfish.” Ideally, self-interest was to be suppressed in the interests of the common good and spiritual attainments. Major shifts in social thought began to occur with the dawning of the renaissance in the 14th century with its greater focus on the personal and temporal that was then followed by the enlightenment period in the 18th century with its emphasis on rationality, systematized thinking, and science. During these periods, the individual, personal identity, and personal expression became increasingly valued. Technological developments also played a role. Interestingly, it has been suggested that one of the more significant technological developments in this regard was the rise of the glass industry in Western Europe and the establishment of mirrors as a common commodity. The widespread availability of mirrors provided individuals for the first time in human history with a stable and accurate representation of their own faces, which allowed them to regard themselves in a different way and encouraged greater self-inspection, including more frequent introspection (for further discussion of this point, see How We Got To Now: Six Innovations That Made the Modern World (2014) by Steven Johnson). 
Since then, political and economic changes and the rise of capitalist societies with their encouragement of personal initiative and positive regard for individual striving and success have promoted a veritable culture of individualism, particularly in North America and Western Europe. Such forces have all contributed to a modern intellectual climate that has made the concept of the individual and the nature of the self and subjectivity available for consideration and conceptual elaboration as never before. 
Conceptualizations of self have been far from homogeneous as discussions in the modern era have unfolded, however. One of the fundamental questions targeted in the intellectual debate has, in fact, been whether there is such a thing as the self. David Hume in his Treatise on Human Nature in 1739 notoriously stated that, when he looked inside himself, he could find many perceptions but nothing linking them together. Since Hume’s denial of the self, other influential philosophers, including Friedrich Nietzsche in the German tradition and Ludwig Wittgenstein in the analytical tradition, have also argued that the self is most reasonably 

========918========

understood to be a fiction that may have some utility for those using the term but that it has no actual substance or basis in reality, that “the self [is simply] a center of narrative gravity,” as Daniel Dennett, the American philosopher has famously put it. It is important to note that these careful arguments have largely tended to be in the context of being directed against particular notions of the self, such as notions that self is fundamentally a kind of disembodied and/or unitary essence, for example. Against such notions, the self may now generally be agreed to be a “fiction.” But such arguments have not been undertaken from a perspective of attempting to describe and understand many of the details of functions that self-representation might actually serve, let alone the details of their neural instantiation. 
Nonetheless, such apparent dismissals of “a self” have had significant influence and have found kinship with the scientific position that has appropriately regarded as untenable notion of an “entity” (i.e., homunculus) controlling brain processes and behavior. For some scientists, the very term “self” has been associated with this problematic notion of a homunculus within the brain and, as a consequence, has been rejected as a subject worthy of investigation. 
Other scientists, however, have not been so dismissive and have approached the study of operations supporting an individual organism’s subjectivity and sense of personal-state ownership from a conceptual vantage point that includes the consideration of biological necessity and evolutionary pressures. Neuroscientists Rodolfo Llinás and Walter Freeman, for example, have both used the term “self” to refer to that locus of properties that permit a mobile organism to sustain its viability as an individual organism. Though the details of their formulations differ, both consider the self from a comparative perspective and regard the primary need for a “self” to be related to mobile organisms’ capacities for goal- directed behavior in an environment. That is, in contrast to organisms incapable of active movement, mobile organisms need to be able to predict the effects of their actions on their environment. Otherwise the outcomes of their actions would be purposeless and potentially dangerous. They need to be able to “own” their behavior (though this need not be conscious) and distinguish their behavior’s effects from effects attributable to other forces in their environment. 
There are also other scientists, notably social and personality psychologists, who have routinely employed self terminology in their work. However, their use of this term has tended to be relatively specific to the consideration of humans and their functioning as social beings. Usually the “self” under consideration in this research tradition has referred to some socially constructed aspect of a person, such as social role or other aspect of social identity. 
Such differences in terminology regarding “self” have led to some 

========919========

confusion as individuals from diverse disciplines have begun to use the same technologies, such as neuroimaging, in their experimental work. Because investigators have not always articulated their assumptions or defined their terms when referring to the self, and they have not always made clear what functions of the self they are interested in studying, it has not been uncommon for there to be a “clash of cultures” as investigators attempt to communicate with others about issues in this scientific area. However, it is also in such settings that a large part of the impetus for more careful articulation of concepts and specific questions to be addressed has been growing. 
MULTIDIMENSIONALITY OF SELF 
In those areas of scientific discourse where progress has been made, it has become increasingly clear that a single discrete referent for the concept “self” does not exist. There is also no property of the concept “self” that is present in all instances of “self” processing and absent in all instances of “nonself” or “other” processing. Properties or characteristics by which “self” is sometimes defined (e.g., being a particular kind of mental phenomenon or having a particular kind of function) do not apply to all instances in which the concept is used, and none is unique to it. Concepts like that of “self” have fuzzy boundaries. Such concepts are fuzzy because the content or boundaries of application vary according to context or conditions. 
Work that has been undertaken from comparative evolutionary and human developmental perspectives is particularly useful in illustrating this with regard to notions of the self. Importantly, both of these perspectives are grounded in considerations of the biology and adaptive functioning of organisms. Across the animal kingdom and in human ontogeny, self- representational processes, which are necessarily operationalized in the nervous system, clearly vary in their degree of complexity and in the self- representational phenomena that they support. Yet it is also the case that, from both of these perspectives, “self” may be regarded as the set of mechanisms or means by which individuals (and, more specifically, their nervous systems) organize their perceptions, plans, and decisions, allowing them to act as a coherent whole rather than as a group of independently operating systems with competing interests. It is, in fact, when such coherence significantly breaks down that self-pathology is thought to exist, and affected individuals (if they are capable of sufficient insight) may actually report that aspects of their experience or behavior seem “foreign” to them or unmanageable by them. 
Comparative Evolutionary Perspective 
Scientists who study various animal species are among those that have been interested in the question of how organisms represent themselves to 

========920========

themselves. Because such scientists consider the conservation or loss of certain bodily structures and capacities across species (in this case, conservation or loss of organisms’ capacities to recognize aspects of themselves as being or belonging to themselves), they are often able to offer physiological (proximate) and evolutionary (ultimate) explanations for “why” such capacities exist. 
In contrast to organisms of greater complexity, simple vertebrates are observed to be very limited in their self-representational capacities. In these simple animals, such capacities are confined to mechanisms that coordinate visceral and other internal signals with perceptions of the outside world that allow them to distinguish the boundaries of themselves or the effects of their own actions from other phenomena in the environment and generate responses that enable their survival (e.g., an appendage withdrawal when a noxious stimulus is perceived to have impinged upon it). At this simple level, coordination of responses is automatic and implicit. There is no conscious awareness of a “self” who is the subject of experience or the agent of the action. 
The centralization of such coordinated, even if limited, processing is the neurobiological foundation upon which higher levels of self-representation rest. One widely recognized view on the interdependent relationships between this implicitly coordinated reflexive processing that subserves basic survival functions of the individual organism and the computationally more sophisticated reflective processing that is associated with self- awareness has been provided by Antonio Damasio. He has referred to the most basic level of inner coordination and regulation which in humans is grounded in the brainstem–hypothalamic axis as the “protoself.” Conscious awareness that in humans includes conscious awareness of a uniquely situated subjectivity and sense of ownership, however, requires a nervous system sufficiently evolved and complex that the organism can hold in mind the image of a protoself’s moving through and interacting with the world. These more complex aspects of self that also engender greater flexibility and capacity for decision-making (representation and choice among a range of action alternatives) require greater computational resources. For example, increased accuracy in planning and execution of movement in space–time is believed to have been achieved by the development of cortical (over and above subcortical) models of the body in relation to its environment, so that animals with many limbs are capable of moving in very specific ways and at very specific times to meet current demands. 
Human Developmental Perspective 
Researchers in child and adolescent development also operate on the basis of regarding human beings not as unitary but as integrated multidimensional beings whose capacities emerge and mature over time. 


